<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>An Anatomy of the World</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<article id="an-anatomy-of-the-world" epub:type="part">
			<header>
				<h2 epub:type="title">An Anatomy of the World</h2>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">Wherein, by occasion of the untimely death of Mistress Elizabeth Drury, the frailty and the decay of this whole world is represented.</p>
			</header>
			<article id="the-first-anniversary" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">The First Anniversary</h3>
				<section id="the-first-anniversary-1">
					<h4 epub:type="title">To the Praise of the Dead, and the Anatomy</h4>
					<p>
						<span>Well died the world, that we might live to see</span>
						<br/>
						<span>This world of wit, in his Anatomy.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>No evil wants his good; so wilder heirs</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Bedew their fathers’ tombs with forced tears,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Whose state requites their loss; whiles thus we gain</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Well may we walk in blacks, but not complain.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Yet how can I consent the world is dead,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>While this Muse lives, which in his spirit’s stead</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Seems to inform a world, and bids it be,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In spite of loss or frail mortality?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And thou, the subject of this well-born thought,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thrice noble maid, could’st not have found nor sought</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A fitter time to yield to thy sad fate,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Than whiles this spirit lives, that can relate</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thy worth so well to our last nephews’ eyne,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That they shall wonder both at his and thine.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Admired match! where strives in mutual grace</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The cunning pencil, and the comely face;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A task which thy fair goodness made too much</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For the bold pride of vulgar pens to touch.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Enough is us to praise them that praise thee,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And say, that but enough those praises be,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Which, hadst thou lived, had hid their fearful head</span>
						<br/>
						<span>From th’ angry checkings of thy modest red.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Death bars reward and shame; when envy’s gone,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And gain, ’tis safe to give the dead their own.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As then the wise Egyptians wont to lay</span>
						<br/>
						<span>More on their tombs than houses; these of clay,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But those of brass or marble were; so we</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Give more unto thy ghost than unto thee.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Yet what we give to thee, thou gavest to us,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And may’st but thank thyself for being thus.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Yet what thou gavest and wert, O happy maid,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thy grace profess’d all due, where ’tis repaid.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So these high songs, that to thee suited bin,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Serve but to sound thy Maker’s praise in thine,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Which thy dear soul as sweetly sings to him</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Amid the choir of saints, and Seraphim,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As any angel’s tongue can sing of thee.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The subjects differ, though the skill agree.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For as by infant years men judge of age,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thy early love, thy virtues, did presage</span>
						<br/>
						<span>What high part thou bear’st in those best of songs,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Whereto no burden nor no end belongs.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Sing on, thou virgin soul, whose lossful gain</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thy lovesick parents have bewail’d in vain;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Ne’er may thy name be in our songs forgot,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Till we shall sing thy ditty and thy note.</span>
					</p>
					<footer>
						<p epub:type="z3998:signature">Joseph Hall</p>
					</footer>
				</section>
				<section id="the-first-anniversary-2">
					<header>
						<hgroup>
							<h4 epub:type="title">An Anatomy of the World</h4>
							<p epub:type="subtitle">The First Anniversary</p>
						</hgroup>
						<p epub:type="bridgehead">What life the world hath still⁠—The sickness of the world⁠—Impossibility of health⁠—Shortness of life⁠—Smallness of stature⁠—Decay of nature in other parts⁠—Disformity of parts⁠—Disorder in the world⁠—Weakness in the want of correspondence of heaven and earth⁠—Conclusion.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>When that rich soul which to her heaven is gone,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Whom all do celebrate, who know they’ve one</span>
						<br/>
						<span>—For who is sure he hath a soul, unless</span>
						<br/>
						<span>It see, and judge, and follow worthiness,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And by deeds praise it? he who doth not this,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>May lodge an inmate soul, but ’tis not his⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>When that queen ended here her progress time,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And, as to her standing house, to heaven did climb</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Where, loth to make the saints attend her long,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>She’s now a part both of the choir and song,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>This world in that great earthquake languished;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For in a common bath of tears it bled,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Which drew the strongest vital spirits out.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But succour’d then with a perplexed doubt,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Whether the world did lose, or gain in this</span>
						<br/>
						<span>—Because, since now no other way there is,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But goodness, to see her, whom all would see,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>All must endeavour to be good as she⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>This great consumption to a fever turn’d,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And so the world had fits; it joy’d, it mourn’d;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And as men think that agues physic are,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And th’ ague being spent, give over care;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So thou, sick world, mistakest thyself to be</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Well, when, alas! thou’rt in a lethargy.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Her death did wound and tame thee then, and then</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thou might’st have better spared the sun, or man.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That wound was deep, but ’tis more misery,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That thou hast lost thy sense and memory.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>’Twas heavy then to hear thy voice of moan,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But this is worse, that thou art speechless grown.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thou hast forgot thy name thou hadst; thou wast</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Nothing but she, and her thou hast o’erpast.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For, as a child kept from the fount, until</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A prince, expected long, come to fulfil</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The ceremonies, thou unnamed hadst laid,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Had not her coming thee her palace made.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Her name defined thee, gave thee form and frame,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And thou forget’st to celebrate thy name.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Some months she hath been dead⁠—but being dead,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Measures of time are all determined⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But long she hath been away, long, long, yet none</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Offers to tell us who it is that’s gone.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But as in states doubtful of future heirs,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>When sickness without remedy impairs</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The present prince, they’re loth it should be said,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The prince doth languish, or the prince is dead.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So mankind, feeling now a general thaw,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A strong example gone, equal to law,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The cement, which did faithfully compact</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And glue all virtues, now resolved and slack’d,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thought it some blasphemy to say she was dead,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or that our weakness was discovered</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In that confession; therefore spoke no more,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Than tongues, the soul being gone, the loss deplore.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But though it be too late to succour thee,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Sick world, yea dead, yea putrefied, since she,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thy intrinsic balm and thy preservative,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Can never be renew’d, thou never live,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I⁠—since no man can make thee live⁠—will try</span>
						<br/>
						<span>What we may gain by thy Anatomy.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Her death hath taught us dearly, that thou art</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Corrupt and mortal in thy purest part.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Let no man say, the world itself being dead,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>’Tis labour lost to have discovered</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The world’s infirmities, since there is none</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Alive to study this dissection;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For there’s a kind of world remaining still;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Though she, which did inanimate and fill world still.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The world, be gone, yet in this last long night</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Her ghost doth walk, that is, a glimmering light,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A faint weak love of virtue and of good</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Reflects from her, on them which understood</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Her worth; and though she have shut in all day,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The twilight of her memory doth stay;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Which, from the carcase of the old world free,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Creates a new world, and new creatures be</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Produced; the matter and the stuff of this</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Her virtue, and the form our practice is.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And, though to be thus elemented arm</span>
						<br/>
						<span>These creatures from home-born intrinsic harm</span>
						<br/>
						<span>—For all assumed unto this dignity</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So many weedless paradises be,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Which of themselves produce no venomous sin,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Except some foreign serpent bring it in⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Yet because outward storms the strongest break,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And strength itself by confidence grows weak,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>This new world may be safer, being told</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The dangers and diseases of the old.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For with due temper men do then forego,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or covet things, when they their true worth know.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>There is no health; physicians say that we,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>At best, enjoy but a neutrality.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And can there be worse sickness than to know</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That we are never well, nor can be so?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>We are born ruinous; poor mothers cry</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That children come not right, nor orderly,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Except they headlong come and fall upon</span>
						<br/>
						<span>An ominous precipitation.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>How witty’s ruin, how importunate</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Upon mankind! it labour’d to frustrate</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Even God’s purpose, and made woman, sent</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For man’s relief, cause of his languishment.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>They were to good ends, and they are so still,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But accessory, and principal in ill;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For that first marriage was our funeral;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>One woman, at one blow, then kill’d us all;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And singly, one by one, they kill us now.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>We do delightfully ourselves allow</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To that consumption; and, profusely blind</span>
						<br/>
						<span>We kill ourselves to propagate our kind.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And yet we do not that; we are not men;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>There is not now that mankind which was then,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>When as the sun and man did seem to strive</span>
						<br/>
						<span>—Joint-tenants of the world⁠—who should survive; life.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>When stag, and raven, and the long-lived tree,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Compared with man, died in minority;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>When if a slow-paced star had stolen away</span>
						<br/>
						<span>From the observer’s marking, he might stay</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Two or three hundred years to see it again,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And then make up his observation plain;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>When, as the age was long, the size was great;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Man’s growth confess’d, and recompensed the meat;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So spacious and large, that every soul</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Did a fair kingdom and large realm control;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And when the very stature, thus erect,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Did that soul a good way towards heaven direct.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Where is this mankind now? who lives to age</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Fit to be made Methusalem his page?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Alas! we scarce live long enough to try</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Whether a true-made clock run right, or lie.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Old grandsires talk of yesterday with sorrow;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And for our children we reserve to-morrow.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So short is life, that every peasant strives,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In a torn house, or field, to have three lives;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And as in lasting, so in length is man,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Contracted to an inch, who was a span.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For had a man at first in forests stray’d,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or shipwreck’d in the sea, one would have laid</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A wager, that an elephant or whale,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That met him, would not hastily assail</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A thing so equal to him; now, alas!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The fairies and the pigmies well may pass</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As credible; mankind decays so soon,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>We’re scarce our fathers’ shadows cast at noon.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Only death adds to our length; nor are grown</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In stature to be men, till we are none.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But this were light, did our less volume hold</span>
						<br/>
						<span>All the old text; or had we changed to gold</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Their silver, or disposed into less glass</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Spirits of virtue, which then scatter’d was.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But ’tis not so; we’re not retired, but damp’d;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And, as our bodies, so our minds are cramp’d.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>’Tis shrinking, not close weaving that hath thus</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In mind and body both bedwarfed us.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>We seem ambitious God’s whole work to undo;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of nothing He made us, and we strive too</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To bring ourselves to nothing back; and we</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Do what we can to do ’t so soon as He.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With new diseases on ourselves we war,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And with new physic, a worse engine far.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>This man, this world’s vice-emperor, in whom</span>
						<br/>
						<span>All faculties, all graces are at home</span>
						<br/>
						<span>—And if in other creatures they appear,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>They’re but man’s ministers and legates there,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To work on their rebellions, and reduce</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Them to civility, and to man’s use⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>This man, whom God did woo, and, loth to attend</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Till man came up, did down to man descend;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>This man so great, that all that is, is his,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>O, what a trifle, and poor thing he is!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>If man were anything, he’s nothing now.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Help, or at least some time to waste, allow</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To his other wants, yet when he did depart</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With her whom we lament, he lost his heart.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>She, of whom th’ ancients seemed to prophesy,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>When they called virtues by the name of <em>she</em>;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>She, in whom virtue was so much refined,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That for allay unto so pure a mind</span>
						<br/>
						<span>She took the weaker sex; she that could drive</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The poisonous tincture, and the stain of Eve,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Out of her thoughts and deeds, and purify</span>
						<br/>
						<span>All by a true religious alchemy;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>She, she is dead; she’s dead; when thou know’st this</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thou know’st how poor a trifling thing man is,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And learn’st thus much by our Anatomy,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The heart being perish’d, no part can be free,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And that except thou feed, not banquet, on</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The supernatural food, religion,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thy better growth grows withered and scant;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Be more than man, or thou’rt less than an ant.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Then as mankind, so is the world’s whole frame,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Quite out of joint, almost created lame;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For before God had made up all the rest,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Corruption enter’d and depraved the best.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>It seized the angels, and then first of all</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The world did in her cradle take a fall,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And turn’d her brains, and took a general maim,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Wronging each joint of th’ universal frame.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The noblest part, man, felt it first; and then</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Both beasts and plants, cursed in the curse of man.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So did the world from the first hour decay;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That evening was beginning of the day.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And now the springs and summers which we see,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Like sons of women after fifty be.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And new philosophy calls all in doubt;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The element of fire is quite put out;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Decay of nature in other parts.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The sun is lost, and th’ earth, and no man’s wit</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Can well direct him where to look for it.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And freely men confess that this world’s spent,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>When in the planets, and the firmament</span>
						<br/>
						<span>They seek so many new; they see that this</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Is crumbled out again to his atomies.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>’Tis all in pieces, all coherence gone,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>All just supply, and all relation.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Prince, subject, father, son, are things forgot.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For every man alone thinks he hath got</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To be a phoenix, and that then can be</span>
						<br/>
						<span>None of that kind of which he is, but he.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>This is the world’s condition now, and now</span>
						<br/>
						<span>She that should all parts to reunion bow;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>She that had all magnetic force alone,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To draw and fasten sunder’d parts in one;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>She whom wise nature had invented then,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>When she observed that every sort of men</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Did in their voyage in this world’s sea stray,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And needed a new compass for their way;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>She that was best, and first original</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of all fair copies, and the general</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Steward to fate; she whose rich eyes and breast</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Gilt the West Indies, and perfumed the East;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Whose having breathed in this world did bestow</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Spice on those isles, and bade them still smell so;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And that rich Indy, which doth gold inter,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Is but as single money coin’d from her;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>She to whom this world must itself refer,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As suburbs, or the microcosm of her;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>She, she is dead; she’s dead; when thou know’st this,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thou know’st how lame a cripple this world is;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And learn’st thus much by our Anatomy,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That this world’s general sickness doth not lie</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In any humour, or one certain part,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But as thou saw’st it, rotten at the heart.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thou seest a hectic fever hath got hold</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of the whole substance, not to be controll’d;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And that thou hast but one way, not to admit</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The world’s infection⁠—to be none of it.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For the world’s subtlest immaterial parts</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Feel this consuming wound and age’s darts;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For the world’s beauty is decay’d, or gone</span>
						<br/>
						<span>—Beauty; that’s colour and proportion.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>We think the heavens enjoy their spherical,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Their round proportion, embracing all;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But yet their various and perplexed course,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Observed in divers ages, doth enforce</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Men to find out so many eccentric parts,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Such diverse downright lines, such overthwarts,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As disproportion that pure form; it tears</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The firmament in eight-and-forty shares,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And in these constellations then arise</span>
						<br/>
						<span>New stars, and old do vanish from our eyes;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As though heaven suffered earthquakes, peace or war,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>When new towers rise, and old demolish’d are.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>They have impaled within a zodiac</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The free-born sun, and keep twelve signs awake</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To watch his steps; the Goat and Crab control,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And fright him back, who else to either pole,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Did not these tropics fetter him, might run.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For his course is not round, nor can the sun</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Perfect a circle, or maintain his way</span>
						<br/>
						<span>One inch direct; but where he rose to-day</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He comes no more, but with a cozening line,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Steals by that point, and so is serpentine;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And seeming weary with his reeling thus,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He means to sleep, being now fallen nearer us.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So of the stars which boast that they do run</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In circle still, none ends where he begun.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>All their proportion’s lame, it sinks, it swells;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For of meridians and parallels</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Man hath weaved out a ret, and this net thrown</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Upon the heavens, and now they are his own.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Loth to go up the hill, or labour thus</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To go to heaven, we make heaven come to us.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>We spur, we rein the stars, and in their race</span>
						<br/>
						<span>They’re diversely content to obey our pace.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But keeps the earth her round proportion still?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Doth not a Teneriffe or higher hill</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Rise so high like a rock, that one might think</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The floating moon would shipwreck there and sink?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Seas are so deep that whales, being struck to-day,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Perchance to-morrow scarce at middle way</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of their wish’d journey’s end, the bottom, die.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And men, to sound depths, so much line untie</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As one might justly think that there would rise</span>
						<br/>
						<span>At end thereof one of th’ antipodes.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>If under all a vault infernal be</span>
						<br/>
						<span>—Which sure is spacious, except that we</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Invent another torment, that there must</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Millions into a straight hot room be thrust⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Then solidness and roundness have no place.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Are these but warts and pockholes in the face</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of th’ earth? Think so; but yet confess, in this</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The world’s proportion disfigured is;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That those two legs whereon it doth rely,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Reward and punishment, are bent awry.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And, O, it can no more be questioned,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That beauty’s best proportion is dead,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Since even grief itself, which now alone</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Is left us, is without proportion.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>She, by whose lines proportion should be</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Examined, measure of all symmetry,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Whom had that ancient seen, who thought souls made</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of harmony, he would at next have said</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That harmony was she, and thence infer</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That souls were but resultances from her,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And did from her into our bodies go,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As to our eyes the forms from objects flow;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>She, who if those great doctors truly said</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That th’ ark to man’s proportion was made,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Had been a type for that, as that might be</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A type of her in this, that contrary</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Both elements and passions lived at peace</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In her, who caused all civil war to cease.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>She, after whom what form soe’er we see</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Is discord and rude incongruity;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>She, she is dead; she’s dead; when thou know’st this,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thou know’st how ugly a monster this world is;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And learn’st thus much by our Anatomy,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That here is nothing to enamour thee;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And that not only faults in inward parts,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Corruptions in our brains, or in our hearts,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Poisoning the fountains whence our actions spring,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Endanger us; but that if everything</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Be not done fitly and in proportion,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To satisfy wise and good lookers-on</span>
						<br/>
						<span>—Since most men be such as most think they be⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>They’re loathsome too, by this deformity.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For good, and well, must in our actions meet;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Wicked is not much worse than indiscreet.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But beauty’s other second element,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Colour and lustre, now is as near spent.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And had the world his just proportion,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Were it a ring still, yet the stone is gone.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As a compassionate turquoise, which doth tell,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By looking pale, the wearer is not well;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As gold falls sick being stung with mercury,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>All the world’s parts of such complexion be</span>
						<br/>
						<span>When nature was most busy, the first week,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Swaddling the new-born earth, God seem’d to like</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That she should sport herself sometimes, and play,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To mingle and vary colours every day;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And then, as though she could not make enow,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Himself his various rainbow did allow.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Sight is the noblest sense of any one;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Yet sight hath only colour to feed on,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And colour is decay’d; summer’s robe grows</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Dusky, and like an oft dyed garment shows.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Our blushing red, which used in cheeks to spread,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Is inward sunk, and only our souls are red.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Perchance the world might have recovered,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>If she whom we lament had not been dead.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But she, in whom all white, and red, and blue</span>
						<br/>
						<span>(Beauty’s ingredients) voluntary grew,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As in an unvex’d paradise; from whom</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Did all things’ verdure, and their lustre come;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Whose composition was miraculous,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Being all colour, all diaphanous,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For air and fire but thick gross bodies were,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And liveliest stones but drowsy and pale to her;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>She, she is dead; she’s dead; when thou know’st this,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thou know’st how wan a ghost this our world is;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And learn’st thus much by our Anatomy,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That it should more affright than pleasure thee;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And that, since all fair colour then did sink,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>’Tis now but wicked vanity, to think</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To colour vicious deeds with good pretence,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or with bought colours to illude men’s sense.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Nor in ought more this world’s decay appears,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Than that her influence the heaven forbears,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or that the elements do not feel this.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The father or the mother barren is;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The clouds conceive not rain, or do not pour,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In the due birth-time, down the balmy shower;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Th’ air doth not motherly sit on the earth,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To hatch her seasons, and give all things birth.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Spring-times were common cradles, but are tombs,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And false conceptions fill the general wombs.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Th’ air shows such meteors, as none can see,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Not only what they mean, but what they be;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Earth such new worms, as would have troubled much</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Th’ Egyptian Mages to have made more such.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>What artist now dares boast that he can bring</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Heaven hither, or constellate anything,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So as the influence of those stars may be</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Imprison’d in an herb, or charm, or tree,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And do by touch, all which those stars could do?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The art is lost, and correspondence too,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For heaven gives little, and the earth takes less,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And man least knows their trade and purposes.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>If this commerce ’twixt heaven and earth were not</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Embarr’d, and all this traffic quite forgot,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>She, for whose loss we have lamented thus,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Would work more fully, and powerfully on us.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Since herbs and roots by dying lose not all,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But they, yea ashes too, are medicinal;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Death could not quench her virtue so, but that</span>
						<br/>
						<span>It would be⁠—if not follow’d⁠—wonder’d at;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And all the world would be one dying swan,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To sing her funeral praise, and vanish then.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But as some serpents’ poison hurteth not,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Except it be from the live serpent shot,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So doth her virtue need her here, to fit</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That unto us, she working more than it.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But she, in whom to such maturity</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Virtue was grown, past growth, that it must die;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>She, from whose influence all impression came,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But by receivers’ impotencies lame;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Who, though she could not transubstantiate</span>
						<br/>
						<span>All states to gold, yet gilded every state,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So that some princes have some temperance;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Some counsellors, some purpose to advance</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The common profit; and some people have</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Some stay, no more than kings should give, to crave;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Some women have some taciturnity;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Some nunneries some grains of chastity;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>She, that did thus much, and much more could do,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But that our age was iron, and rusty too,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>She, she is dead; she’s dead; when thou know’st this</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thou know’st how dry a cinder this world is;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And learn’st thus much by our Anatomy,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That ’tis in vain to dew, or mollify</span>
						<br/>
						<span>It with thy tears, or sweat, or blood; nothing</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Is worth our travail, grief, or perishing,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But those rich joys which did possess her heart,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of which she’s now partaker, and a part.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But as in cutting up a man that’s dead,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Conclusion The body will not last out, to have read</span>
						<br/>
						<span>On every part, and therefore men direct</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Their speech to parts that are of most effect;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So the world’s carcase would not last, if I</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Were punctual in this Anatomy;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Nor smells it well to hearers, if one tell</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Them their disease, who fain would think they’re well.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Here therefore be the end; and blessed maid,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of whom is meant whatever has been said,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or shall be spoken well by any tongue,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Whose name refines coarse lines, and makes prose song,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Accept this tribute, and his first year’s rent;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Who till his dark short taper’s end be spent,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As oft as thy feast sees this widow’d earth,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Will yearly celebrate thy second birth;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That is, thy death; for though the soul of man</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Be got when man is made, ’tis born but then</span>
						<br/>
						<span>When man doth die; our body’s as the womb,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And as a mid-wife death directs it home.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And you, her creatures, whom she works upon,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And have your last and best concoction</span>
						<br/>
						<span>From her example and her virtue, if you</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In reverence to her do think it due,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That no one should her praises thus rehearse,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As matter fit for chronicle, not verse;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Vouchsafe to call to mind that God did make</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A last and lasting’st piece, a song.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To Moses to deliver unto all He spake</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That song, because He knew they would let fall</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The law, the prophets, and the history,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But keep the song still in their memory.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Such an opinion, in due measure, made</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Me this great office boldly to invade;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Nor could incomprehensibleness deter</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Me from thus trying to imprison her;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Which when I saw that a strict grave could do,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I saw not why verse might not do so too.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Verse hath a middle nature; heaven keeps souls,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The grave keeps bodies, verse the fame enrolls.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="a-funeral-elegy">
					<header>
						<h4 epub:type="title">A Funeral Elegy</h4>
						<p epub:type="bridgehead">Smallness of stature.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>’Tis loss to trust a tomb with such a guest,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or to confine her in a marble chest.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Alas! what’s marble, jet, or porphyry,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Prized with the chrysolite of either eye,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or with those pearls and rubies which she was?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Join the two Indies in one tomb, ’tis glass;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And so is all, to her materials,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Though every inch were ten Escurials;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Yet she’s demolish’d; can we keep her then</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In works of hands, or of the wits of men?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Can these memorials, rags of paper, give</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Life to that name, by which name they must live?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Sickly, alas! short-lived, abortive be</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Those carcase verses, whose soul is not she;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And can she, who no longer would be she,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Being such a tabernacle stoop to be</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In paper wrapp’d; or when she would not lie</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In such an house, dwell in an elegy?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But ’tis no matter; we may well allow</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Verse to live so long as the world will now,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For her death wounded it. The world contains</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Princes for arms, and counsellors for brains,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Lawyers for tongues, divines for hearts, and more,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The rich for stomachs, and for backs the poor;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The officers for hands, merchants for feet,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By which remote and distant countries meet;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But those fine spirits, which do tune and set</span>
						<br/>
						<span>This organ, are those pieces which beget</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Wonder and love; and these were she; and she</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Being spent, the world must needs decrepit be.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For since death will proceed to triumph still,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He can find nothing, after her, to kill,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Except the world itself, so great as she.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thus brave and confident may nature be,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Death cannot give her such another blow,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Because she cannot such another show.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But must we say she’s dead? may ’t not be said,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That as a sunder’d clock is piecemeal laid,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Not to be lost, but by the maker’s hand</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Repolish’d, without error then to stand,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or as the Afric Niger stream enwombs</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Itself into the earth, and after comes</span>
						<br/>
						<span>—Having first made a natural bridge, to pass</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For many leagues⁠—far greater than it was,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>May ’t not be said, that her grave shall restore</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Her, greater, purer, firmer than before?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Heaven may say this, and joy in ’t, but can we</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Who live, and lack her here, this vantage see?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>What is ’t to us, alas! if there have been</span>
						<br/>
						<span>An angel made a throne, or cherubin?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>We lose by ’t: and as agèd men are glad</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Being tasteless grown, to joy in joys they had,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So now the sick, starved world must feed upon</span>
						<br/>
						<span>This joy, that we had her, who now is gone.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Rejoice then, nature, and this world, that you,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Fearing the last fires hastening to subdue</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Your force and vigour, ere it were near gone,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Wisely bestow’d and laid it all on one;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>One, whose clear body was so pure and thin,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Because it need disguise no thought within;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>’Twas but a through-light scarf her mind to enroll,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or exhalation breathed out from her soul;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>One whom all men, who durst no more, admired;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And whom, whoe’er had worth enough, desired;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As when a temple ’s built, saints emulate</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To which of them it shall be consecrate.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But as, when heaven looks on us with new eyes,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Those new stars every artist exercise;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>What place they should assign to them they doubt,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Argue, and agree not, till those stars go out;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So the world studied whose this piece should be,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Till she can be nobody’s else, nor she;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But like a lamp of balsamum, desired</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Rather to adorn than last, she soon expired.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Clothed in her virgin white integrity</span>
						<br/>
						<span>—For marriage, though it doth not stain, doth dye⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To ’scape th’ infirmities which wait upon</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Woman, she went away before she was one;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And the world’s busy noise to overcome,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Took so much death as served for opium;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For though she could not, nor could choose to die,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>She hath yielded to too long an ecstasy.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He which, not knowing her sad history,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Should come to read the book of destiny,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>How fair, and chaste, humble and high she’d been,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Much promised, much perform’d, at not fifteen,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And measuring future things by things before,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Should turn the leaf to read, and read no more,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Would think that either destiny mistook,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or that some leaves were torn out of the book.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But ’tis not so; fate did but usher her</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To years of reason’s use, and then infer</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Her destiny to herself, which liberty</span>
						<br/>
						<span>She took, but for thus much, thus much to die.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Her modesty not suffering her to be</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Fellow-commissioner with destiny,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>She did no more but die; if after her</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Any shall live, which dare true good prefer,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Every such person is her delegate,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To accomplish that which should have been her fate.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>They shall make up that book, and shall have thanks</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of fate, and her, for filling up their blanks;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For future virtuous deeds are legacies,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Which from the gift of her example rise;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And ’tis in heaven part of spiritual mirth,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To see how well the good play her, on earth.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
			</article>
			<article id="the-second-anniversary" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">The Second Anniversary</h3>
				<section id="the-second-anniversary-1">
					<header>
						<h4 epub:type="title">The Harbinger to the Progress</h4>
						<p epub:type="bridgehead">Wherein, by occasion of the religious death of Mistress Elizabeth Drury, the incommodities of the soul in this life, and her exaltation in the next, are contemplated.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Two souls move here, and mine, a third, must move</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Paces of admiration and of love.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thy soul, dear virgin, whose this tribute is,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Moved from this mortal sphere to lively bliss</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And yet moves still, and still aspires to see</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The world’s last day, thy glory’s full degree,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Like as those stars which thou o’erlookest far,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Are in their place, and yet still movèd are.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>No soul⁠—whiles with the luggage of this clay</span>
						<br/>
						<span>It clogged is⁠—Scan follow thee half-way;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or see thy flight, which doth our thoughts outgo</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So fast, as now the lightning moves but slow.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But now thou art as high in heaven flown</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As heavens from us, what soul besides thine own</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Can tell thy joys, or say he can relate</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thy glorious journals in that blessed state?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I envy thee, rich soul, I envy thee,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Although I cannot yet thy glory see.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And thou, great spirit, which hers followed hast</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So fast, as none can follow thine so fast;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So far, as none can follow thine so far</span>
						<br/>
						<span>—And if this flesh did not the passage bar,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Hadst caught her⁠—let me wonder at thy flight,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Which long agone hadst lost the vulgar sight,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And now makest proud the better eyes, that they</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Can see thee lessened in thine airy way.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So while thou makest her soul by progress known,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thou makest a noble progress of thine own,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>From this world’s carcase having mounted high</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To that pure life of immortality;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Since thine aspiring thoughts themselves so raise</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That more may not beseem a creature’s praise,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Yet still thou vow’st her more, and every year</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Makest a new progress, while thou wanderest here,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Still upward mount; and let thy Maker’s praise</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Honour thy Laura, and adorn thy lays.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And since thy Muse her head in heaven shrouds,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Oh, let her never stoop below the clouds;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And if those glorious sainted souls may know</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or what we do, or what we sing below,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Those acts, those songs shall still content them best</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Which praise those awful Powers that make them blest.</span>
					</p>
					<footer>
						<p epub:type="z3998:signature">Joseph Hall</p>
					</footer>
				</section>
				<section id="the-second-anniversary-2">
					<hgroup>
						<h4 epub:type="title">Of the Progress of the Soul</h4>
						<p epub:type="subtitle">The Second Anniversary</p>
					</hgroup>
					<p>
						<span>Nothing could make me sooner to confess</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That this world had an everlastingness,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Than to consider, that a year is run,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Since both this lower world’s, and the sun’s sun,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The lustre and the vigour of this all</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Did set; ’twere blasphemy to say, did fall.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But as a ship, which hath struck sail, doth run</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By force of that force which before it won;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or as sometimes in a beheaded man,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Though at those two Red Seas, which freely ran,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>One from the trunk, another from the head,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>His soul be sail’d to her eternal bed,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>His eyes will twinkle, and his tongue will roll,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As though he beckon’d and call’d back his soul:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He grasps his hands, and he pulls up his feet,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And seems to reach, and to step forth to meet</span>
						<br/>
						<span>His soul; when all these motions which we saw,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Are but as ice, which crackles at a thaw,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or as a lute, which in moist weather rings</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Her knell alone, by cracking of her strings.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So struggles this dead world, now she is gone;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For there is motion in corruption.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As some days are, at the creation, named</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Before the sun, the which framed days, was framed,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So after this sun’s set, some show appears,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And orderly vicissitude of years.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Yet a new deluge, and of Lethe flood,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Hath drown’d us all; all have forgot all good,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Forgetting her, the main reserve of all.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Yet in this deluge, gross and general,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thou seest me strive for life; my life shall be</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To be hereafter praised, for praising thee.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Immortal maid, who though thou wouldst refuse</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The name of mother, be unto my Muse</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A father, since her chaste ambition is</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Yearly to bring forth such a child as this.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>These hymns may work on future wits, and so</span>
						<br/>
						<span>May great-grandchildren of thy praises grow;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And so, though not revive, embalm and spice</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The world, which else would putrify with vice.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For thus man may extend thy progeny,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Until man do but vanish, and not die.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>These hymns thy issue may increase so long,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As till God’s great Venite change the song.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thirst for that time, O my insatiate soul,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And serve thy thirst with God’s safe-sealing bowl;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Be thirsty still, and drink still till thou go</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To th’ only health; to be hydroptic so,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Forget this rotten world; and unto thee</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Let thine own times as an old story be.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Be not concern’d; study not why nor when;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Do not so much as not believe a man.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For though to err, be worst, to try truths forth</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Is far more business than this world is worth.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The world is but a carcass; thou art fed</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By it, but as a worm that carcass bred;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And why shouldst thou, poor worm, consider more</span>
						<br/>
						<span>When this world will grow better than before,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Than those thy fellow-worms do think upon</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That carcass’s last resurrection?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Forget this world, and scarce think of it so,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As of old clothes cast off a year ago.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To be thus stupid is alacrity;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Men thus lethargic have best memory.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Look upward; that’s towards her, whose happy state</span>
						<br/>
						<span>We now lament not, but congratulate.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>She, to whom all this world was but a stage,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Where all sat hearkening how her youthful age</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Should be employ’d, because in all she did</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Some figure of the golden times was hid.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Who could not lack, whate’er this world give,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Because she was the form that made it live;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Nor could complain that this world was unfit</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To be stay’d in, then when she was in it;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>She, that first tried indifferent desires</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By virtue, and virtue by religious fires;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>She, to whose person paradise adhered, could</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As courts to princes; she, whose eyes ensphered</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Star-light enough to have made the South control</span>
						<br/>
						<span>—Had she been there⁠—the star-full Northern Pole;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>She, she is gone; she’s gone; when thou know’st this,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>What fragmentary rubbish this world is</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thou know’st, and that it is not worth a thought;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He honours it too much that thinks it nought.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Think then, my soul, that death is but a groom,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Which brings a taper to the outward room,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Whence thou spiest first a little glimmering light,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And after brings it nearer to thy sight;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For such approaches doth heaven make in death.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Think thyself labouring now with broken breath,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And think those broken and soft notes to be</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Division, and thy happiest harmony.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Think thee laid on thy death-bed, loose and slack,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And think that but unbinding of a pack,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To take one precious thing, thy soul, from thence.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Think thyself parch’d with fever’s violence;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Anger thine ague more, by calling it</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thy physic; chide the slackness of the fit.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Think that thou hear’st thy knell, and think no more,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But that, as bells call’d thee to church before,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So this to the triumphant church calls thee.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Think Satan’s sergeants round about thee be,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And think that but for legacies they thrust;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Give one thy pride, to another give thy lust;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Give them those sins which they gave thee before,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And trust th’ immaculate blood to wash thy score.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Think thy friends weeping round, and think that they</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Weep but because they go not yet thy way.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Think that they close thine eyes, and think in this,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That they confess much in the world amiss,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Who dare not trust a dead man’s eye with that</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Which they from God and angels cover not.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Think that they shroud thee up, and think from thence</span>
						<br/>
						<span>They reinvest thee in white innocence.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Think that thy body rots, and⁠—if so low,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thy soul exalted so, thy thoughts can go⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Think thee a prince, who of themselves create</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Worms, which insensibly devour their state.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Think that they bury thee, and think that rite</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Lays thee to sleep but a Saint Lucy’s night.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Think these things cheerfully, and if thou be</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Drowsy, or slack, remember then that she,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>She, whose complexion was so even made,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That which of her ingredients should invade</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The other three, no fear, no art could guess;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So far were all removed from more or less;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>—But as in mithridate, or just perfumes,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Where all good things being met, no one presumes</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To govern, or to triumph on the rest,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Only because all were, no part was, best;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And as, though all do know, that quantities</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Are made of lines, and lines from points arise,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>None can these lines or quantities unjoint</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And say, this is a line, or this a point;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So though the elements and humours were</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In her, one could not say, this governs there,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Whose even constitution might have won</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Any disease to venture on the sun</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Rather than her; and make a spirit fear</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That he to disuniting subject were;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To whose proportions if we would compare</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Cubes, they are unstable, circles, angular⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>She who was such a chain as fate employs</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To bring mankind all fortunes it enjoys;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So fast, so even wrought, as one would think,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>No accident could threaten any link;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>She, she embraced a sickness, gave it meat,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The purest blood, and breath, that e’er it eat;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And hath taught us, that though a good man hath</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Title to heaven, and plead it by his faith,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And though he may pretend a conquest, since</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Heaven was content to suffer violence,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Yea though he plead a long possession too</span>
						<br/>
						<span>—For they’re in heaven on earth who heaven’s works do⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Though he had right and power and place, before,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Yet death must usher, and unlock the door.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Think further on thyself, my soul, and think</span>
						<br/>
						<span>How thou at first wast made but in a sink.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Think that it argued some infirmity,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That those two souls, which then thou found’st in me,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thou fed’st upon, and drew’st into thee both</span>
						<br/>
						<span>My second soul of sense, and first of growth.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Think but how poor thou wast, how obnoxious;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Whom a small lump of flesh could poison thus.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>This curded milk, this poor unlitter’d whelp,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>My body, could, beyond escape or help,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Infect thee with original sin, and thou</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Couldst neither then refuse, nor leave it now.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Think that no stubborn, sullen anchorite,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Which fix’d to a pillar, or a grave, doth sit</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Bedded and bathed in all his ordures, dwells</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So foully as our souls in their first-built cells.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Think in how poor a prison thou didst lie,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>After, enabled but to suck, and cry.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Think, when ’twas grown to most, ’twas a poor inn,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A province pack’d up in two yards of skin;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And that usurp’d, or threaten’d with a rage</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of sicknesses, or their true mother, age.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But think that death hath now enfranchised thee;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thou hast thy expansion now, and liberty.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Think that a rusty piece, discharged, is flown</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In pieces, and the bullet is his own,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And freely flies; this to thy soul allow.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Think thy shell broke, think thy soul hatch’d but now.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And think this slow-paced soul which late did cleave</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To a body, and went but by the body’s leave,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Twenty perchance, or thirty mile a day,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Dispatches in a minute all the way</span>
						<br/>
						<span>’Twixt heaven and earth; she stays not in the air,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To look what meteors there themselves prepare;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>She carries no desire to know, nor sense,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Whether th’ air’s middle region be intense;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For th’ element of fire, she doth not know,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Whether she pass’d by such a place or no;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>She baits not at the moon, nor cares to try</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Whether in that new world men live, and die;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Venus retards her not to inquire, how she</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Can⁠—being one star⁠—Hesper and Vesper be;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He that charm’d Argus’ eyes, sweet Mercury,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Works not on her, who now is grown all eye;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Who if she meet the body of the sun,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Goes through, not staying till his course be run;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Who finds in Mars his camp no corps of guard,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Nor is by Jove, nor by his father barr’d;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But ere she can consider how she went,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>At once is at, and through the firmament;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And as these stars were but so many beads</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Strung on one string, speed undistinguish’d leads</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Her through those spheres, as through the beads a string,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Whose quick succession makes it still one thing.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As doth the pith, which, lest our bodies slack,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Strings fast the little bones of neck and back,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So by the soul doth death string heaven and earth;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For when our soul enjoys this her third birth</span>
						<br/>
						<span>—Creation gave her one, a second, grace⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Heaven is as near and present to her face</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As colours are and objects, in a room,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Where darkness was before, when tapers come.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>This must, my soul, thy long-short progress be</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To advance these thoughts; remember then that she,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>She, whose fair body no such prison was,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But that a soul might well be pleased to pass</span>
						<br/>
						<span>An age in her; she, whose rich beauty lent</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Mintage to other beauties, for they went</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But for so much as they were like to her;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>She, in whose body⁠—if we dare prefer</span>
						<br/>
						<span>This low world to so high a mark as she⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The western treasure, eastern spicery,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Europe, and Afric, and the unknown rest</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Were easily found, or what in them was best;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>—And when we have made this large discovery</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of all, in her some one part then will be</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Twenty such parts, whose plenty and riches is</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Enough to make twenty such worlds as this⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>She, whom had they known, who did first betroth</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The tutelar angels, and assign’d one, both</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To nations, cities, and to companies,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To functions, offices, and dignities,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And to each several man, to him, and him,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>They would have given her one for every limb;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>She, of whose soul, if we may say, ’twas gold,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Her body was th’ electrum, and did hold</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Many degrees of that; we understood</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Her by her sight; her pure and eloquent blood</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Spoke in her cheeks, and so distinctly wrought</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That one might almost say, her body thought;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>She, she thus richly and largely housed, is gone;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And chides us slow-paced snails who crawl upon</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Our prison’s prison, earth, nor think us well,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Longer than whilst we bear our brittle shell.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But ’twere but little to have changed our room,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>If, as we were in this our living tomb</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Oppress’d with ignorance, we still were so.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Poor soul, in this thy flesh what dost thou know?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thou know’st thyself so little, as thou know’st not</span>
						<br/>
						<span>How thou didst die, nor how thou wast begot.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thou neither know’st how thou at first camest in</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Nor how thou took’st the poison of man’s sin;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Nor dost thou⁠—though thou know’st that thou art So⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By what way thou art made immortal, know.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thou art too narrow, wretch, to comprehend</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Even thyself, yea though thou wouldst but bend</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To know thy body. Have not all souls thought</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For many ages, that our bodies wrought</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of air, and fire, and other elements?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And now they think of new ingredients;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And one soul thinks one, and another way</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Another thinks, and ’tis an even lay.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Know’st thou but how the stone doth enter in</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The bladder’s cave, and never break the skin?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Know’st thou how blood, which to the heart doth flow,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Doth from one ventricle to th’ other go?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And for the putrid stuff which thou dost spit,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Know’st thou how thy lungs have attracted it?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>There are no passages, so that there is</span>
						<br/>
						<span>—For aught thou know’st⁠—piercing of substances.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And of those many opinions which men raise</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of nails and hairs, dost thou know which to praise?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>What hope have we to know ourselves, when we</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Know not the least things which for our use be?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>We see in authors, too stiff to recant,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A hundred controversies of an ant;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And yet one watches, starves, freezes, and sweats,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To know but catechisms and alphabets</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of unconcerning things, matters of fact,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>How others on our stage their parts did act,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>What Cæsar did, yea, and what Cicero said.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Why grass is green, or why our blood is red,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Are mysteries which none have reach’d unto.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In this low form, poor soul, what wilt thou do?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>When wilt thou shake off this pedantry,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of being taught by sense and fantasy?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thou look’st through spectacles; small things seem great</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Below; but up unto the watch-tower get,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And see all things despoil’d of fallacies;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thou shalt not peep through lattices of eyes,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Nor hear through labyrinths of ears, nor learn</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By circuit or collections to discern.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In heaven thou straight know’st all concerning it,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And what concerns it not shalt straight forget.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>There thou⁠—but in no other school⁠—may’st be,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Perchance, as learned and as full as she;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>She, who all libraries had throughly read</span>
						<br/>
						<span>At home in her own thoughts, and practisèd</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So much good as would make as many more;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>She, whose example they must all implore,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Who would, or do, or think well, and confess</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That all the virtuous actions they express</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Are but a new and worse edition</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of her some one thought or one action;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>She, who in th’ art of knowing heaven, was grown</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Here upon earth to such perfection,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That she hath, ever since to heaven she came</span>
						<br/>
						<span>—In a far fairer print⁠—but read the same;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>She, she not satisfied with all this weight⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For so much knowledge as would over-freight</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Another, did but ballast her⁠—is gone,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As well to enjoy, as get perfection;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And calls us after her, in that she took</span>
						<br/>
						<span>(Taking herself) our best and worthiest book.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Return not, my soul, from this ecstasy</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And meditation of what thou shalt be,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To earthly thoughts, till it to thee appear</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With whom thy conversation must be there.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With whom wilt thou converse? what station</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Canst thou choose out, free from infection,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That will not give thee theirs, nor drink in thine?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Shalt thou not find a spongy slack divine</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Drink and suck in th’ instructions of great men,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And for the word of God vent them again?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Are there not some courts⁠—and then, no things be</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So like as courts⁠—which in this let us see</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That wits and tongues of libellers are weak,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Because they do more ill than these can speak?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The poison’s gone through all; poisons affect</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Chiefly the chiefest parts, but some effect</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In nails, and hairs, yea excrements, will show;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So lies the poison of sin in the most low.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Up, up, my drowsy soul, where thy new ear</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Shall in the angels’ songs no discord hear;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Where thou shalt see the blessed mother-maid</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Joy in not being that which men have said;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Where she’s exalted, more for being good</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Than for her interest of motherhood;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Up to those patriarchs, which did longer sit</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Expecting Christ, than they’ve enjoy’d Him yet;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Up to those prophets, which now gladly see</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Their prophecies grown to be history;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Up to th’ apostles, who did bravely run</span>
						<br/>
						<span>All the sun’s course, with more light than the sun;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Up to those martyrs, who did calmly bleed</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Oil to th’ apostles’ lamps, dew to their seed;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Up to those virgins, who thought that almost</span>
						<br/>
						<span>They made joint-tenants with the Holy Ghost,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>If they to any should His temple give;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Up, up, for in that squadron there doth live</span>
						<br/>
						<span>She, who hath carried thither new degrees,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As to their number, to their dignities;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>She, who being to herself a state, enjoy’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>All royalties which any state employ’d;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For she made wars, and triumph’d; reason still</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Did not o’erthrow, but rectify her will;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And she made peace, for no peace is like this,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That beauty and chastity together kiss.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>She did high justice, for she crucified</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Every first motion of rebellious pride.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And she gave pardons, and was liberal,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For, only herself except, she pardon’d all.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>She coin’d, in this, that her impression gave</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To all our actions all the worth they have.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>She gave protections; the thoughts of her breast</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Satan’s rude officers could ne’er arrest.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As these prerogatives being met in one</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Made her a sovereign state, religion</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Made her a church; and these two made her all.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>She who was all this All, and could not fall</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To worse, by company, for she was still</span>
						<br/>
						<span>More antidote than all the world was ill,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>She, she doth leave it, and by death survive</span>
						<br/>
						<span>All this, in heaven; whither who doth not strive</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The more, because she’s there, he doth not know</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That accidental joys in heaven do grow.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But pause, my soul, and study, ere thou fall</span>
						<br/>
						<span>On accidental joys, th’ essential.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Still, before accessories do abide</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A trial, must the principal be tried.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And what essential joy canst thou expect</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Here upon earth? what permanent effect</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of transitory causes? Dost thou love</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Beauty⁠—and beauty worthiest is to move⁠—?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Poor cozened cozener, that she, and that thou,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Which did begin to love, are neither now;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>You are both fluid, changed since yesterday;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Next day repairs⁠—but ill⁠—last day’s decay.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Nor are⁠—although the river keep the name⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Yesterday’s waters and to-day’s the same.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So flows her face, and thine eyes; neither now</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That saint nor pilgrim, which your loving vow</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Concern’d, remains; but whilst you think you be</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Constant, you’re hourly in inconstancy.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Honour may have pretence unto our love,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Because that God did live so long above</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Without this honour, and then loved it so,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That He at last made creatures to bestow</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Honour on Him, not that He needed it,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But that to His hands man might grow more fit.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But since all honours from inferiors flow,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>—For they do give it; princes do but show</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Whom they would have so honour’d⁠—and that this</span>
						<br/>
						<span>On such opinions and capacities</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Is built, as rise and fall to more and less;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Alas! ’tis but a casual happiness.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Hath ever any man to himself assigned</span>
						<br/>
						<span>This or that happiness to arrest his mind,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But that another man which takes a worse,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thinks him a fool for having ta’en that course?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>They who did labour Babel’s tower to erect,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Might have considered, that for that effect</span>
						<br/>
						<span>All this whole solid earth could not allow</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Nor furnish forth materials enow;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And that his centre, to raise such a place,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Was far too little to have been the base.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>No more affords this world foundation</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To erect true joy, were all the means in one;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But as the heathen made them several gods</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of all God’s benefits, and all His rods</span>
						<br/>
						<span>—For as the wine, and corn, and onions are</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Gods unto them, so agues be, and war⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And as by changing that whole precious gold</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To such small copper coins, they lost the old,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And lost their only God, who ever must</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Be sought alone, and not in such a thrust;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So much mankind true happiness mistakes;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>No joy enjoys that man, that many makes.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Then, soul, to thy first pitch work up again;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Know that all lines which circles do contain,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For once that they the centre touch, do touch</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Twice the circumference; and be thou such,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Double on heaven thy thoughts on earth employ’d.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>—All will not serve; only who have enjoy’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The sight of God in fullness can think it;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For it is both the object and the wit.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>This is essential joy, where neither He</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Can suffer diminution, nor we;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>’Tis such a full, and such a filling good,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Had th’ angels once look’d on Him, they had stood.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To fill the place of one of them, or more,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>She whom we celebrate is gone before;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>She, who had here so much essential joy,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As no chance could distract, much less destroy;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Who with God’s presence was acquainted so</span>
						<br/>
						<span>—Hearing and speaking to Him⁠—as to know</span>
						<br/>
						<span>His face in any natural stone or tree,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Better than when in images they be;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Who kept, by diligent devotion,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>God’s image in such reparation</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Within her heart, that what decay was grown</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Was her first parents’ fault, and not her own;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Who, being solicited to any act,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Still heard God pleading His safe precontract;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Who by a faithful confidence, was here</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Betroth’d to God, and now is married there;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Whose twilights were more clear than our mid-day;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Who dreamt devoutlier than most use to pray;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Who, being here fill’d with grace, yet strove to be</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Both where more grace and more capacity</span>
						<br/>
						<span>At once is given; she to heaven is gone,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Who made this world in some proportion</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A heaven, and here became unto us all</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Joy⁠—as our joys admit⁠—essential.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But could this low world joys essential touch,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Heaven’s accidental joys would pass them much.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>How poor and lame must then our casual be?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>If thy prince will his subjects to call thee</span>
						<br/>
						<span>My lord, and this do swell thee, thou art then,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By being greater, grown to be less man.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>When no physician of redress can speak,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A joyful casual violence may break</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A dangerous aposthume in thy breast;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And whilst thou joyest in this, the dangerous rest,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The bag, may rise up, and so strangle thee.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Whate’er was casual, may ever be.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>What should the nature change? or make the same</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Certain, which was but casual, when it came?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>All casual joy doth loud and plainly say,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Only by coming, that it can away.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Only in heaven joy’s strength is never spent,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And accidental things are permanent.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Joy of a soul’s arrival ne’er decays,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For that soul ever joys and ever stays.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Joy that their last great consummation</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Approaches in the resurrection,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>When earthly bodies more celestial</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Shall be, than angels’ were, for they could fall;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>This kind of joy doth every day admit</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Degrees of growth, but none of losing it.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In this fresh joy, ’tis no small part that she,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>She, in whose goodness he that names degree</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Doth injure her⁠—’tis loss to be called best</span>
						<br/>
						<span>There, where the stuff is not such as the rest⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>She, who left such a body, as even she</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Only in heaven could learn how it can be</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Made better; for she rather was two souls,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or like to full on both sides written rolls,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Where eyes might read upon the outward skin,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As strong records for God as minds within;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>She, who by making full perfection grow,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Pieces a circle, and still keeps it so;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Long’d for, and longing for ’t, to heaven is gone,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Where she receives, and gives addition.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Here, in a place where mis-devotion frames</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A thousand prayers to saints, whose very names</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The ancient Church knew not, Heaven knows not yet;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And where what laws of poetry admit,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Laws of religion have at least the same;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Immortal maid, I might invoke thy name.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Could any saint provoke that appetite,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thou here should’st make me a French convertite.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But thou would’st not; nor would’st thou be content,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To take this, for my second year’s true rent,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Did this coin bear any other stamp than His,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That gave thee power to do, me to say this.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Since His will is, that to posterity</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thou should’st for life and death a pattern be,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And that the world should notice have of this,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The purpose and th’ authority is His.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thou art the proclamation; and I am</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The trumpet, at whose voice the people came.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
			</article>
		</article>
	</body>
</html>
