<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Divine Poems</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<article id="divine-poems" epub:type="part">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Divine Poems</h2>
			<section id="to-the-earl-of-doncaster" epub:type="dedication z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">To the Earl of Doncaster, with Six Holy Sonnets</h3>
				<p>
					<span>See, sir, how, as the sun’s hot masculine flame</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Begets strange creatures on Nile’s dirty slime,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In me your fatherly yet lusty rhyme</span>
					<br/>
					<span>—For these songs are their fruits⁠—have wrought the same.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But though th’ engend’ring force from which they came</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Be strong enough, and Nature doth admit</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Seven to be born at once; I send as yet</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But six; they say the seventh hath still some maim.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I choose your judgment, which the same degree</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Doth with her sister, your invention, hold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As fire these drossy rhymes to purify,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or as elixir, to change them to gold.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">You are that alchemist, which always had</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wit, whose one spark could make good things of bad.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="la-corona" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<hgroup>
					<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</h3>
					<p epub:type="title" xml:lang="es">La Corona</p>
				</hgroup>
				<p>
					<span>
						<em>Deign at my hands this crown of prayer and praise,</em>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Weaved in my lone devout melancholy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou which of good hast, yea, art treasury,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All changing unchanged Ancient of days.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But do not with a vile crown of frail bays</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Reward my Muse’s white sincerity;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But what Thy thorny crown gain’d, that give me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A crown of glory, which doth flower always.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The ends crown our works, but Thou crown’st our ends,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For at our ends begins our endless rest.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The first last end, now zealously possess’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With a strong sober thirst my soul attends.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Tis time that heart and voice be lifted high;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<em>Salvation to all that will is nigh.</em>
					</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="annunciation" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<hgroup>
					<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</h3>
					<p epub:type="title">Annunciation</p>
				</hgroup>
				<p>
					<span>
						<em>Salvation to all that will is nigh;</em>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That All, which always is all everywhere,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which cannot sin, and yet all sins must bear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which cannot die, yet cannot choose but die,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lo! faithful Virgin, yields Himself to lie</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In prison, in thy womb; and though He there</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Can take no sin, nor thou give, yet He’ll wear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Taken from thence, flesh, which death’s force may try.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ere by the spheres time was created thou</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wast in His mind, who is thy Son, and Brother;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whom thou conceivest, conceived; yea, thou art now</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy Maker’s maker, and thy Father’s mother.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou hast light in dark, and shutt’st in little room</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<em>Immensity, cloister’d in thy dear womb.</em>
					</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="nativity" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<hgroup>
					<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</h3>
					<p epub:type="title">Nativity</p>
				</hgroup>
				<p>
					<span>
						<em>Immensity, cloister’d in thy dear womb,</em>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now leaves His well-beloved imprisonment.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There he hath made himself to his intent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Weak enough, now into our world to come.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But O for thee, for Him, hath th’ inn no room?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet lay Him in this stall, and from th’ orient,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stars, and wise men will travel to prevent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The effects of Herod’s jealous general doom.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>See’st thou, my soul, with thy faith’s eye, how He</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which fills all place, yet none holds Him, doth lie?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was not His pity towards thee wondrous high,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That would have need to be pitied by thee?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Kiss Him, and with Him into Egypt go,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<em>With His kind mother, who partakes thy woe.</em>
					</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="temple" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<hgroup>
					<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</h3>
					<p epub:type="title">Temple</p>
				</hgroup>
				<p>
					<span>
						<em>With His kind mother, who partakes thy woe,</em>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Joseph, turn back; see where your child doth sit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Blowing, yea blowing out those sparks of wit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which Himself on the doctors did bestow.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Word but lately could not speak, and lo!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It suddenly speaks wonders; whence comes it,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That all which was, and all which should be writ,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A shallow seeming child should deeply know?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His Godhead was not soul to His manhood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor had time mellow’d Him to this ripeness;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But as for one which hath a long task, ’tis good,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With the sun to begin His business,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He in His age’s morning thus began,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<em>By miracles exceeding power of man.</em>
					</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="crucifying" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<hgroup>
					<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">V</h3>
					<p epub:type="title">Crucifying</p>
				</hgroup>
				<p>
					<span>
						<em>By miracles exceeding power of man,</em>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He faith in some, envy in some begat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For, what weak spirits admire, ambitious hate;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In both affections many to Him ran.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But the worst are most, they will and can,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Alas! and do, unto th’ Immaculate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose creature Fate is, now prescribe a fate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Measuring self-life’s infinity to span,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nay to an inch. Lo! where condemned He</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bears His own cross, with pain, yet by and by</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When it bears him, He must bear more and die.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now Thou art lifted up, draw me to Thee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And at Thy death giving such liberal dole,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<em>Moist with one drop of Thy blood my dry soul.</em>
					</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="resurrection" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<hgroup>
					<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VI</h3>
					<p epub:type="title">Resurrection</p>
				</hgroup>
				<p>
					<span>
						<em>Moist with one drop of Thy blood, my dry soul</em>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall⁠—though she now be in extreme degree</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Too stony hard, and yet too fleshly⁠—be</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Freed by that drop, from being starved, hard or foul,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And life by this death abled shall control</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Death, whom Thy death slew; nor shall to me</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fear of first or last death bring misery,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If in Thy life-book my name thou enroll.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Flesh in that long sleep is not putrified,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But made that there, of which, and for which it was;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor can by other means be glorified.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>May then sin’s sleep and death soon from me pass,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That waked from both, I again risen may</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<em>Salute the last and everlasting day.</em>
					</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="ascension" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<hgroup>
					<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VII</h3>
					<p epub:type="title">Ascension</p>
				</hgroup>
				<p>
					<span>
						<em>Salute the last and everlasting day,</em>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Joy at th’ uprising of this Sun, and Son,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ye whose true tears, or tribulation</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Have purely wash’d, or burnt your drossy clay.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Behold, the Highest, parting hence away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lightens the dark clouds, which He treads upon;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor doth He by ascending show alone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But first He, and He first enters the way.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O strong Ram, which hast batter’d heaven for me!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mild Lamb which with Thy Blood hast mark’d the path!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bright Torch, which shinest, that I the way may see!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O, with Thy own Blood quench Thy own just wrath;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And if Thy Holy Spirit my Muse did raise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<em>Deign at my hands this crown of prayer and praise.</em>
					</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<article id="to-the-lady-magdalen-herbert-of-st-mary-magdalen" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">To the Lady Magdalen Herbert, of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">St.</abbr> Mary Magdalen</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Her of your name, whose fair inheritance</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Bethina was, and jointure Magdalo,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>An active faith so highly did advance,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That she once knew, more than the Church did know,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Resurrection; so much good there is</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Deliver’d of her, that some Fathers be</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Loth to believe one woman could do this;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But think these Magdalens were two or three.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Increase their number, Lady, and their fame;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To their devotion add your innocence;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Take so much of th’ example as of the name,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The latter half; and in some recompense,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That they did harbour Christ Himself, a guest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Harbour these hymns, to His dear Name address’d</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="holy-sonnets" epub:type="division">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Holy Sonnets</h3>
				<section id="holy-sonnet-1" epub:type="z3998:poem">
					<h4 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</h4>
					<p>
						<span>Thou hast made me, and shall Thy work decay?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Repair me now, for now mine end doth haste;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I run to death, and Death meets me as fast,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And all my pleasures are like yesterday.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I dare not move my dim eyes any way;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Despair behind, and Death before doth cast</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Such terror, and my feeble flesh doth waste</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By sin in it, which it towards hell doth weigh.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Only Thou art above, and when towards Thee</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By Thy leave I can look, I rise again;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But our old subtle foe so tempteth me,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That not one hour myself I can sustain.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thy grace may wing me to prevent his art</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And thou like adamant draw mine iron heart.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="holy-sonnet-2" epub:type="z3998:poem">
					<h4 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</h4>
					<p>
						<span>As due by many titles I resign</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Myself to thee, O God. First I was made</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By Thee; and for Thee, and when I was decay’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thy blood bought that, the which before was Thine.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I am Thy son, made with Thyself to shine,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thy servant, whose pains Thou hast still repaid,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thy sheep, Thine image, and⁠—till I betray’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Myself⁠—a temple of Thy Spirit divine.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Why doth the devil then usurp on me?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Why doth he steal, nay ravish, that’s Thy right?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Except Thou rise and for Thine own work fight,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>O! I shall soon despair, when I shall see</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That Thou lovest mankind well, yet wilt not choose me,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And Satan hates me, yet is loth to lose me.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="holy-sonnet-3" epub:type="z3998:poem">
					<h4 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</h4>
					<p>
						<span>O! might those sighs and tears return again</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Into my breast and eyes, which I have spent,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That I might in this holy discontent</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Mourn with some fruit, as I have mourn’d in vain.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In mine idolatry what showers of rain</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Mine eyes did waste? what griefs my heart did rent?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That sufferance was my sin, I now repent;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>’Cause I did suffer, I must suffer pain.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Th’ hydroptic drunkard, and night-scouting thief,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The itchy lecher, and self-tickling proud</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Have the remembrance of past joys, for relief</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of coming ills. To poor me is allow’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>No ease; for long, yet vehement grief hath been</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Th’ effect and cause, the punishment and sin.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="holy-sonnet-4" epub:type="z3998:poem">
					<h4 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</h4>
					<p>
						<span>O, my black soul, now thou art summoned</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By sickness, Death’s herald and champion;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thou’rt like a pilgrim, which abroad hath done</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Treason, and durst not turn to whence he’s fled;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or like a thief, which till death’s doom be read,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Wisheth himself deliver’d from prison,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But damn’d and haled to execution,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Wisheth that still he might be imprisoned.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Yet grace, if thou repent, thou canst not lack;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But who shall give thee that grace to begin?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>O, make thyself with holy mourning black,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And red with blushing, as thou art with sin;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or wash thee in Christ’s blood, which hath this might,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That being red, it dyes red souls to white.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="holy-sonnet-5" epub:type="z3998:poem">
					<h4 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">V</h4>
					<p>
						<span>I am a little world made cunningly</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of elements, and an angelic sprite;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But black sin hath betray’d to endless night</span>
						<br/>
						<span>My world’s both parts, and, O, both parts must die.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>You which beyond that heaven which was most high</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Have found new spheres, and of new land can write,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Pour new seas in my eyes, that so I might</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Drown my world with my weeping earnestly,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or wash it if it must be drown’d no more.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But, O, it must be burnt; alas! the fire</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of lust and envy burnt it heretofore,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And made it fouler; let their flames retire,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And burn me, O Lord, with a fiery zeal</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of Thee and Thy house, which doth in eating heal.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="holy-sonnet-6" epub:type="z3998:poem">
					<h4 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VI</h4>
					<p>
						<span>This is my play’s last scene; here heavens appoint</span>
						<br/>
						<span>My pilgrimage’s last mile; and my race</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Idly, yet quickly run, hath this last pace;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>My span’s last inch, my minutes’ latest point;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And gluttonous Death will instantly unjoint</span>
						<br/>
						<span>My body and soul, and I shall sleep a space;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But my ever-waking part shall see that face,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Whose fear already shakes my every joint.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Then, as my soul to heaven her first seat takes flight,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And earth-born body in the earth shall dwell,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So fall my sins, that all may have their right,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To where they’re bred and would press me to hell.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Impute me righteous, thus purged of evil,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For thus I leave the world, the flesh, the devil.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="holy-sonnet-7" epub:type="z3998:poem">
					<h4 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VII</h4>
					<p>
						<span>At the round earth’s imagined corners blow</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Your trumpets, angels, and arise, arise</span>
						<br/>
						<span>From death, you numberless infinities</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of souls, and to your scattered bodies go;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>All whom the flood did, and fire shall o’erthrow,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>All whom war, death, age, agues, tyrannies,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Despair, law, chance hath slain, and you, whose eyes</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Shall behold God, and never taste death’s woe.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But let them sleep, Lord, and me mourn a space;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For, if above all these my sins abound,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>’Tis late to ask abundance of Thy grace,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>When we are there. Here on this lowly ground,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Teach me how to repent, for that’s as good</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As if Thou hadst seal’d my pardon with Thy blood.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="holy-sonnet-8" epub:type="z3998:poem">
					<h4 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VIII</h4>
					<p>
						<span>If faithful souls be alike glorified</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As angels, then my father’s soul doth see,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And adds this even to full felicity,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That valiantly I hell’s wide mouth o’erstride.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But if our minds to these souls be descried</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By circumstances, and by signs that be</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Apparent in us not immediately,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>How shall my mind’s white truth by them be tried?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>They see idolatrous lovers weep and mourn,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And stile blasphemous conjurers to call</span>
						<br/>
						<span>On Jesu’s name, and pharisaical</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Dissemblers feign devotion. Then turn,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>O pensive soul, to God, for He knows best</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thy grief, for He put it into my breast.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="holy-sonnet-9" epub:type="z3998:poem">
					<h4 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IX</h4>
					<p>
						<span>If poisonous minerals, and if that tree,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Whose fruit threw death on (else immortal) us,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>If lecherous goats, if serpents envious</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Cannot be damn’d, alas! why should I be?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Why should intent or reason, born in me,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Make sins, else equal, in me more heinous?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And, mercy being easy, and glorious</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To God, in His stern wrath why threatens He?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But who am I, that dare dispute with Thee?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>O God, O! of Thine only worthy blood,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And my tears, make a heavenly Lethean flood,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And drown in it my sin’s black memory.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That Thou remember them, some claim as debt;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I think it mercy if Thou wilt forget.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="holy-sonnet-10" epub:type="z3998:poem">
					<h4 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">X</h4>
					<p>
						<span>Death, be not proud, though some have called thee</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Mighty and dreadful, for thou art not so;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For those, whom thou think’st thou dost overthrow,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Die not, poor Death, nor yet canst thou kill me.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>From rest and sleep, which but thy picture be,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Much pleasure, then from thee much more must flow,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And soonest our best men with thee do go,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Rest of their bones, and soul’s delivery.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thou’rt slave to Fate, chance, kings, and desperate men,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And dost with poison, war, and sickness dwell,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And poppy, or charms can make us sleep as well,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And better than thy stroke; why swell’st thou then?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>One short sleep past, we wake eternally,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And Death shall be no more; Death, thou shalt die.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="holy-sonnet-11" epub:type="z3998:poem">
					<h4 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XI</h4>
					<p>
						<span>Spit in my face, you Jews, and pierce my side,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Buffet, and scoff, scourge, and crucify me,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For I have sinn’d, and sinn’d, and only He,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Who could do no iniquity, hath died.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But by my death can not be satisfied</span>
						<br/>
						<span>My sins, which pass the Jews’ impiety.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>They kill’d once an inglorious man, but I</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Crucify him daily, being now glorified.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>O let me then His strange love still admire;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Kings pardon, but He bore our punishment;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And Jacob came clothed in vile harsh attire,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But to supplant, and with gainful intent;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>God clothed Himself in vile man’s flesh, that so</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He might be weak enough to suffer woe.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="holy-sonnet-12" epub:type="z3998:poem">
					<h4 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XII</h4>
					<p>
						<span>Why are we by all creatures waited on?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Why do the prodigal elements supply</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Life and food to me, being more pure than I,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Simpler and further from corruption?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Why brook’st thou, ignorant horse, subjection?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Why dost thou, bull and boar, so sillily</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Dissemble weakness, and by one man’s stroke die,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Whose whole kind you might swallow and feed upon?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Weaker I am, woe’s me, and worse than you;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>You have not sinn’d, nor need be timorous.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But wonder at a greater, for to us</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Created nature doth these things subdue;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But their Creator, whom sin, nor nature tied,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For us, His creatures, and His foes, hath died.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="holy-sonnet-13" epub:type="z3998:poem">
					<h4 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIII</h4>
					<p>
						<span>What if this present were the world’s last night?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Mark in my heart, O soul, where thou dost dwell,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The picture of Christ crucified, and tell</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Whether His countenance can thee affright.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Tears in His eyes quench the amazing light;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Blood fills his frowns, which from His pierced head fell;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And can that tongue adjudge thee unto hell,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Which pray’d forgiveness for His foes’ fierce spite?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>No, no; but as in my idolatry</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I said to all my profane mistresses,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Beauty of pity, foulness only is</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A sign of rigour; so I say to thee,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To wicked spirits are horrid shapes assign’d;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>This beauteous form assumes a piteous mind.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="holy-sonnet-14" epub:type="z3998:poem">
					<h4 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIV</h4>
					<p>
						<span>Batter my heart, three-person’d God; for you</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As yet but knock; breathe, shine, and seek to mend;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That I may rise, and stand, o’erthrow me, and bend</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Your force, to break, blow, burn, and make me new.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I, like an usurp’d town, to another due,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Labour to admit you, but O, to no end.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Reason, your viceroy in me, me should defend,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But is captived, and proves weak or untrue.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Yet dearly I love you, and would be loved fain,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But am betroth’d unto your enemy;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Divorce me, untie, or break that knot again,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Take me to you, imprison me, for I,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Except you enthrall me, never shall be free,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>sNor ever chaste, except you ravish me.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="holy-sonnet-15" epub:type="z3998:poem">
					<h4 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XV</h4>
					<p>
						<span>Wilt thou love God as He thee? then digest,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>My soul, this wholesome meditation,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>How God the Spirit, by angels waited on</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In heaven, doth make His temple in thy breast.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The Father having begot a Son most blest,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And still begetting⁠—for he ne’er begun⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Hath deign’d to choose thee by adoption,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Co-heir to His glory, and Sabbath’s endless rest.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And as a robb’d man, which by search doth find</span>
						<br/>
						<span>His stolen stuff sold, must lose or buy it again,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The Sun of glory came down, and was slain,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Us whom He had made, and Satan stole, to unbind.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>’Twas much, that man was made like God before,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But, that God should be made like man, much more.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="holy-sonnet-16" epub:type="z3998:poem">
					<h4 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XVI</h4>
					<p>
						<span>Father, part of His double interest</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Unto Thy kingdom Thy Son gives to me;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>His jointure in the knotty Trinity</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He keeps, and gives to me his death’s conquest.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>This Lamb, whose death with life the world hath blest,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Was from the world’s beginning slain, and He</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Hath made two wills, which with the legacy</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of His and Thy kingdom do thy sons invest.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Yet such are these laws, that men argue yet</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Whether a man those statutes can fulfil.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>None doth; but thy all-healing grace and Spirit</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Revive again what law and letter kill.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thy law’s abridgement, and Thy last command</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Is all but love; O let this last Will stand!</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="holy-sonnet-17" epub:type="z3998:poem">
					<h4 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XVII</h4>
					<p>
						<span>Since she whom I loved hath paid her last debt</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To nature, and to hers, and my good is dead,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And her soul early into heaven ravished,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Wholly on heavenly things my mind is set.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Here the admiring her my mind did whet</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To seek thee God; so streams do show their head,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But though I have found thee, and thou my thirst hast fed,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A holy thirsty dropsy melts mee yet.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But why should I beg more love, when as thou</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Dost woo my soul for hers; offering all thine:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And dost not only fear least I allow</span>
						<br/>
						<span>My Love to saints and angels things divine,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But in thy tender jealousy dost doubt</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Least the World, flesh, yea Devil put thee out.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="holy-sonnet-18" epub:type="z3998:poem">
					<h4 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XVIII</h4>
					<p>
						<span>Show me dear Christ, thy spouse, so bright and clear.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>What, is it she, which on the other shore</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Goes richly painted? or which robbed and tore</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Laments and mourns in Germany and here?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Sleeps she a thousand, then peeps up one year?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Is she self truth and errs? now new, now outwore?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Doth she, and did she, and shall she evermore</span>
						<br/>
						<span>On one, on seven, or on no hill appear?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Dwells she with us, or like adventuring knights</span>
						<br/>
						<span>First travail we to seek and then make Love?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Betray kind husband thy spouse to our sights,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And let mine amorous soul court thy mild dove,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Who is most true, and pleasing to thee, then</span>
						<br/>
						<span>When she is embraced and open to most men.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="holy-sonnet-19" epub:type="z3998:poem">
					<h4 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIX</h4>
					<p>
						<span>Oh, to vex me, contraries meet in one:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Inconstancy unnaturally hath begot</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A constant habit; that when I would not</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I change in vows, and in devotion.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As humorous is my contrition</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As my profane love, and as soon forgot:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As riddlingly distempered, cold and hot,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As praying, as mute; as infinite, as none.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I durst not view heaven yesterday; and today</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In prayers, and flattering speeches I court God:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Tomorrow I quake with true fear of his rod.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So my devout fits come and go away</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Like a fantastic ague: save that here</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Those are my best days, when I shake with fear.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
			</article>
			<article id="the-cross" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">The Cross</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Since Christ embraced the cross itself, dare I</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His image, th’ image of His cross, deny?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Would I have profit by the sacrifice,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And dare the chosen altar to despise?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It bore all other sins, but is it fit</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That it should bear the sin of scorning it?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who from the picture would avert his eye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How would he fly his pains who there did die?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From me no pulpit, nor misgrounded law,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor scandal taken, shall this cross withdraw,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It shall not, for it cannot; for the loss</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of this cross were to me another cross.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Better were worse, for no affliction,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No cross is so extreme, as to have none.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who can blot out the cross, which th’ instrument</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of God dew’d on me in the Sacrament?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who can deny me power, and liberty</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To stretch mine arms, and mine own cross to be?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Swim, and at every stroke thou art thy cross;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The mast and yard make one, where seas do toss;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Look down, thou spiest out crosses in small things;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Look up, thou seest birds raised on crossed wings;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All the globe’s frame, and spheres, is nothing else</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But the meridians crossing parallels.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Material crosses then good physic be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But yet spiritual have chief dignity.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These for extracted chemic medicine serve,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And cure much better, and as well preserve.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then are you your own physic, or need none,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When still’d or purged by tribulation;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For when that cross ungrudged unto you sticks,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then are you to yourself a crucifix.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As perchance carvers do not faces make,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But that away, which hid them there, do take;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let crosses, so, take what hid Christ in thee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And be His image, or not His, but He.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But, as oft alchemists do coiners prove,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So may a self-despising get self-love;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And then, as worst surfeits of best meats be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So is pride, issued from humility,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For ’tis no child, but monster; therefore cross</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Your joy in crosses, else ’tis double loss.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And cross thy senses, else both they and thou</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Must perish soon, and to destruction bow.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For if the eye seek good objects, and will take</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No cross from bad, we cannot ’scape a snake.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So with harsh, hard, sour, stinking; cross the rest;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Make them indifferent; call, nothing best.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But most the eye needs crossing, that can roam,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And move; to th’ others th’ objects must come home.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And cross thy heart; for that in man alone</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pants downwards, and hath palpitation.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cross those dejections, when it downward tends,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And when it to forbidden heights pretends.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And as the brain through bony walls doth vent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By sutures, which a cross’s form present,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So when thy brain works, ere thou utter it,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cross and correct concupiscence of wit.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Be covetous of crosses; let none fall;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cross no man else, but cross thyself in all.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then doth the cross of Christ work faithfully</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Within our hearts, when we love harmlessly</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The cross’s pictures much, and with more care</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That cross’s children, which our crosses are.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="resurrection-imperfect" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Resurrection, Imperfect</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Sleep, sleep, old sun, thou canst not have repass’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As yet, the wound thou took’st on Friday last;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sleep then, and rest; the world may bear thy stay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A better sun rose before thee to-day;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who⁠—not content to enlighten all that dwell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On the earth’s face, as thou⁠—enlighten’d hell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And made the dark fires languish in that vale,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As at thy presence here our fires grow pale;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose body, having walk’d on earth, and now</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hasting to heaven, would⁠—that He might allow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Himself unto all stations, and fill all⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For these three days become a mineral.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He was all gold when He lay down, but rose</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All tincture, and doth not alone dispose</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Leaden and iron wills to good, but is</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of power to make e’en sinful flesh like his.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had one of those, whose credulous piety</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thought that a soul one might discern and see</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Go from a body, at this sepulchre been,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, issuing from the sheet, this body seen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He would have justly thought this body a soul,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If not of any man, yet of the whole.</span>
				</p>
				<footer>
					<p>
						<i xml:lang="la">Desunt Caetera.</i>
					</p>
				</footer>
			</article>
			<article id="the-annunciation-and-passion" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">The Annunciation and Passion</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Tamely, frail body, abstain to-day; to-day</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My soul eats twice, Christ hither and away.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She sees Him man, so like God made in this,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That of them both a circle emblem is,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose first and last concur; this doubtful day</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of feast or fast, Christ came, and went away;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She sees Him nothing, twice at once, who’s all;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She sees a cedar plant itself, and fall;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her Maker put to making, and the head</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of life at once not yet alive, yet dead;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She sees at once the Virgin Mother stay</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Reclused at home, public at Golgotha;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sad and rejoiced she’s seen at once, and seen</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At almost fifty, and at scarce fifteen;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At once a son is promised her, and gone;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gabriel gives Christ to her, He her to John;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not fully a mother, she’s in orbity;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At once receiver and the legacy.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All this, and all between, this day hath shown,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Th’ abridgement of Christ’s story, which makes one⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As in plain maps, the furthest west is east⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of th’ angels <i xml:lang="la">Ave</i>, and <i xml:lang="la">Consummatum est</i>.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How well the Church, God’s Court of Faculties,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Deals, in sometimes, and seldom joining these.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As by the self-fix’d Pole we never do</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Direct our course, but the next star thereto,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which shows where th’other is, and which we say</span>
					<br/>
					<span>—Because it strays not far⁠—doth never stray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So God by His Church, nearest to him, we know,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And stand firm, if we by her motion go.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His Spirit, as His fiery pillar, doth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lead, and His Church, as cloud; to one end both.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This Church by letting those days join, hath shown</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Death and conception in mankind is one;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or ’twas in Him the same humility,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That He would be a man, and leave to be;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or as creation He hath made, as God,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With the last judgment but one period,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His imitating spouse would join in one</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Manhood’s extremes; He shall come, He is gone;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or as though one blood drop, which thence did fall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Accepted, would have served, He yet shed all,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So though the least of His pains, deeds, or words,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Would busy a life, she all this day affords.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This treasure then, in gross, my soul, uplay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in my life retail it every day.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="good-friday-1613-riding-westward" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Good-Friday, 1613, Riding Westward</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Let man’s soul be a sphere, and then, in this,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Th’ intelligence that moves, devotion is;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And as the other spheres, by being grown</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Subject to foreign motion, lose their own,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And being by others hurried every day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Scarce in a year their natural form obey;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pleasure or business, so, our souls admit</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For their first mover, and are whirl’d by it.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hence is’t, that I am carried towards the west,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This day, when my soul’s form bends to the East.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There I should see a Sun by rising set,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And by that setting endless day beget.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But that Christ on His cross did rise and fall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sin had eternally benighted all.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet dare I almost be glad, I do not see</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That spectacle of too much weight for me.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who sees God’s face, that is self-life, must die;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What a death were it then to see God die?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It made His own lieutenant, Nature, shrink,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It made His footstool crack, and the sun wink.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Could I behold those hands, which span the poles</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And tune all spheres at once, pierced with those holes?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Could I behold that endless height, which is</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Zenith to us and our antipodes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Humbled below us? or that blood, which is</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The seat of all our souls, if not of His,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Made dirt of dust, or that flesh which was worn</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By God for His apparel, ragg’d and torn?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If on these things I durst not look, durst I</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On His distressed Mother cast mine eye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who was God’s partner here, and furnish’d thus</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Half of that sacrifice which ransom’d us?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though these things as I ride be from mine eye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They’re present yet unto my memory,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For that looks towards them; and Thou look’st towards me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O Saviour, as Thou hang’st upon the tree.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I turn my back to Thee but to receive</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Corrections till Thy mercies bid Thee leave.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O think me worth Thine anger, punish me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Burn off my rust, and my deformity;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Restore Thine image, so much, by Thy grace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That Thou mayst know me, and I’ll turn my face.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="a-litany" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">A Litany</h3>
				<section id="a-litany-1">
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</p>
						<p>The Father</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span class="i1">Father of Heaven, and Him, by whom</span>
						<br/>
						<span>It, and us for it, and all else for us,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Thou madest and govern’st ever, come</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And re-create me, now grown ruinous.</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i4">My heart is by dejection, clay,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i4">And by self-murder, red.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>From this red earth, O Father, purge away</span>
						<br/>
						<span>All vicious tinctures, that new-fashioned</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I may rise up from death, before I’m dead.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="a-litany-2">
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</p>
						<p>The Son</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span class="i1">O Son of God, who, seeing two things,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Sin and Death, crept in, which were never made,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">By bearing one, tried’st with what stings</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The other could Thine heritage invade;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i4">O be Thou nail’d unto my heart,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i4">And crucified again;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Part not from it, though it from Thee would part,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But let it be by applying so Thy pain,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Drown’d in Thy blood, and in Thy passion slain.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="a-litany-3">
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</p>
						<p>The Holy Ghost</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span class="i1">O Holy Ghost, whose temple I</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Am, but of mud walls, and condensèd dust,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And being sacrilegiously</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Half wasted with youth’s fires of pride and lust,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i4">Must with new storms be weather-beat,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i4">Double in my heart Thy flame,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Which let devout sad tears intend, and let⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Though this glass lanthorn, flesh, do suffer maim⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Fire, sacrifice, priest, altar be the same.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="a-litany-4">
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</p>
						<p>The Trinity</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span class="i1">O blessed glorious Trinity,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Bones to philosophy, but milk to faith,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Which, as wise serpents, diversely</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Most slipperiness, yet most entanglings hath,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i4">As you distinguish’d, undistinct,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i4">By power, love, knowledge be,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Give me a such self different instinct,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of these let all me elemented be,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of power, to love, to know you unnumbered three.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="a-litany-5">
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">V</p>
						<p>The Virgin Mary</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span class="i1">For that fair blessed mother-maid,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Whose flesh redeem’d us, that she-cherubin,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Which unlock’d paradise, and made</span>
						<br/>
						<span>One claim for innocence, and disseizèd sin,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i4">Whose womb was a strange heaven, for there</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i4">God clothed Himself, and grew,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Our zealous thanks we pour. As her deeds were</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Our helps, so are her prayers; nor can she sue</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In vain, who hath such titles unto you.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="a-litany-6">
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VI</p>
						<p>The Angels</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span class="i1">And since this life our nonage is,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And we in wardship to Thine angels be,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Native in heaven’s fair palaces</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Where we shall be but denizen’d by Thee;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i4">As th’ earth conceiving by the sun,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i4">Yields fair diversity,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Yet never knows what course that light doth run;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So let me study that mine actions be</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Worthy their sight, though blind in how they see.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="a-litany-7">
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VII</p>
						<p>The Patriarchs</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span class="i1">And let Thy patriarchs’ desire,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>—Those great grandfathers of Thy Church, which saw</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">More in the cloud than we in fire,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Whom nature clear’d more, than us grace and law,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i4">And now in heaven still pray, that we</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i4">May use our new helps right⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Be satisfied, and fructify in me;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Let not my mind be blinder by more light,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Nor faith by reason added lose her sight.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="a-litany-8">
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VIII</p>
						<p>The Prophets</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span class="i1">Thy eagle-sighted prophets too,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>—Which were Thy Church’s organs, and did sound</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">That harmony which made of two</span>
						<br/>
						<span>One law, and did unite, but not confound;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i4">Those heavenly poets which did see</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i4">Thy will, and it express</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In rhythmic feet⁠—in common pray for me,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That I by them excuse not my excess</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In seeking secrets, or poeticness.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="a-litany-9">
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IX</p>
						<p>The Apostles</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span class="i1">And thy illustrious zodiac</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of twelve apostles, which engirt this All,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">—From whom whosoever do not take</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Their light, to dark deep pits throw down and fall;⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i4">As through their prayers Thou’st let me know</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i4">That their books are divine,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>May they pray still, and be heard, that I go</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Th’ old broad way in applying; O decline</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Me, when my comment would make Thy word mine.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="a-litany-10">
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">X</p>
						<p>The Martyrs</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span class="i1">And since Thou so desirously</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Didst long to die, that long before Thou couldst,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And long since Thou no more couldst die,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thou in thy scatter’d mystic body wouldst</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i4">In Abel die, and ever since</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i4">In Thine; let their blood come</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To beg for us a discreet patience</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of death, or of worse life; for O, to some</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Not to be martyrs, is a martyrdom.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="a-litany-11">
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XI</p>
						<p>The Confessors</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span class="i1">Therefore with Thee triumpheth there</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A virgin squadron of white confessors,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Whose bloods betroth’d not married were,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Tender’d, not taken by those ravishers.</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i4">They know, and pray that we may know,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i4">In every Christian</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Hourly tempestuous persecutions grow;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Temptations martyr us alive; a man</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Is to himself a Diocletian.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="a-litany-12">
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XII</p>
						<p>The Virgins</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span class="i1">The cold white snowy nunnery,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Which, as Thy Mother, their high abbess, sent</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Their bodies back again to Thee,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As Thou hadst lent them, clean and innocent;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i4">Though they have not obtain’d of Thee,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i4">That or Thy Church or I</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Should keep, as they, our first integrity,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Divorce Thou sin in us, or bid it die,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And call chaste widowhead virginity.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="a-litany-13">
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIII</p>
						<p>The Doctors</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span class="i1">The sacred academy above</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of doctors, whose pains have unclasp’d, and taught</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Both books of life to us⁠—for love</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To know Thy scriptures tells us, we are wrote</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i4">In Thy other book⁠—pray for us there,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i4">That what they have misdone</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or missaid, we to that may not adhere.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Their zeal may be our sin. Lord, let us run</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Mean ways, and call them stars, but not the sun.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="a-litany-14">
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIV</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span class="i1">And whilst this universal quire,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That Church in triumph, this in warfare here,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Warm’d with one all-partaking fire</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of love, that none be lost, which cost Thee dear,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i4">Prays ceaselessly, and Thou hearken too</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i4">—Since to be gracious</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Our task is treble, to pray, bear, and do⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Hear this prayer, Lord; O Lord, deliver us</span>
						<br/>
						<span>From trusting in those prayers, though pour’d out thus.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="a-litany-15">
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XV</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span class="i1">From being anxious, or secure,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Dead clods of sadness, or light squibs of mirth,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">From thinking that great courts immure</span>
						<br/>
						<span>All, or no happiness, or that this earth</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i4">Is only for our prison framed,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i4">Or that Thou’rt covetous</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To them whom Thou lovest, or that they are maim’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>From reaching this world’s sweet who seek Thee thus,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With all their might, good Lord, deliver us.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="a-litany-16">
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XVI</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span class="i1">From needing danger, to be good,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>From owing Thee yesterday’s tears to-day,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">From trusting so much to Thy blood</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That in that hope we wound our soul away,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i4">From bribing Thee with alms, to excuse</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i4">Some sin more burdenous,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>From light affecting, in religion, news,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>From thinking us all soul, neglecting thus</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Our mutual duties, Lord, deliver us.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="a-litany-17">
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XVII</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span class="i1">From tempting Satan to tempt us</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By our connivance, or slack company</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">From measuring ill by vicious</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Neglecting to choke sin’s spawn, vanity,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i4">From indiscreet humility,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i4">Which might be scandalous</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And cast reproach on Christianity,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>From being spies, or to spies pervious,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>From thirst or scorn of fame, deliver us.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="a-litany-18">
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XVIII</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span class="i1">Deliver us through Thy descent</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Into the Virgin, whose womb was a place</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Of middle kind; and Thou being sent</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To ungracious us, stay’dst at her full of grace;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i4">And through Thy poor birth, where first Thou</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i4">Glorified’st poverty;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And yet soon after riches didst allow,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By accepting kings’ gifts in th’ Epiphany;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Deliver us, and make us to both ways free.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="a-litany-19">
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIX</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span class="i1">And through that bitter agony,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Which is still th’ agony of pious wits,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Disputing what distorted Thee,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And interrupted evenness with fits;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i4">And through Thy free confession,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i4">Though thereby they were then</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Made blind, so that Thou mightst from them have gone;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Good Lord, deliver us, and teach us when</span>
						<br/>
						<span>We may not, and we may, blind unjust men.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="a-litany-20">
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XX</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span class="i1">Through Thy submitting all, to blows</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thy face, Thy robes to spoil, Thy fame to scorn,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">All ways, which rage, or justice knows,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And by which Thou couldst show that Thou wast born;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i4">And through Thy gallant humbleness</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i4">Which Thou in death didst show,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Dying before Thy soul they could express;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Deliver us from death, by dying so</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To this world, ere this world do bid us go</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="a-litany-21">
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXI</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span class="i1">When senses, which Thy soldiers are,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>We arm against Thee, and they fight for sin;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">When want, sent but to tame, doth war,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And work despair a breach to enter in;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i4">When plenty, God’s image, and seal,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i4">Makes us idolatrous,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And love it, not him, whom it should reveal;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>When we are moved to seem religious</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Only to vent wit; Lord, deliver us.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="a-litany-22">
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXII</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span class="i1">In churches, when th’ infirmity</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of him which speaks, diminishes the word;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">When magistrates do misapply</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To us, as we judge, lay or ghostly sword;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i4">When plague, which is Thine angel, reigns,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i4">Or wars, Thy champions, sway;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>When heresy, Thy second deluge, gains;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In th’ hour of death, th’ eve of last Judgment day;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Deliver us from the sinister way.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="a-litany-23">
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXIII</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span class="i1">Hear us, O hear us, Lord; to Thee</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A sinner is more music, when he prays,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Than spheres’ or angels’ praises be,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In <i xml:lang="la">panegyric alleluias</i>;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i4">Hear us, for till Thou hear us, Lord,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i4">We know not what to say;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thine ear to our sighs, tears, thoughts, gives voice and word;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>O Thou, who Satan heard’st in Job’s sick day,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Hear Thyself now, for Thou in us dost pray.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="a-litany-24">
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXIV</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span class="i1">That we may change to evenness</span>
						<br/>
						<span>This intermitting aguish piety;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">That snatching cramps of wickedness</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And apoplexies of fast sin may die;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i4">That music of Thy promises,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i4">Not threats in thunder may</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Awaken us to our just offices;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>What in Thy book Thou dost, or creatures say,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That we may hear, Lord, hear us when we pray.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="a-litany-25">
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXV</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span class="i1">That our ears’ sickness we may cure,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And rectify those labyrinths aright,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">That we by heark’ning not procure</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Our praise, nor others’ dispraise so invite;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i4">That we get not a slipp’riness</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i4">And senselessly decline,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>From hearing bold wits jest at kings’ excess,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To admit the like of majesty divine;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That we may lock our ears, Lord, open Thine.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="a-litany-26">
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXVI</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span class="i1">That living law, the magistrate,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Which to give us, and make us physic, doth</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Our vices often aggravate;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That preachers taxing sin, before her growth;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i4">That Satan, and envenom’d men⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i4">Which will, if we starve, dine⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>When they do most accuse us, may see then</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Us to amendment hear them, Thee decline;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That we may open our ears, Lord, lock Thine.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="a-litany-27">
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXVII</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span class="i1">That learning, Thine ambassador,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>From Thine allegiance we never tempt;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">That beauty, paradise’s flower</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For physic made, from poison be exempt;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i4">That wit⁠—born apt high good to do⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i4">By dwelling lazily</span>
						<br/>
						<span>On nature’s nothing be not nothing too;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That our affections kill us not, nor die;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Hear us, weak echoes, O, Thou Ear and Eye.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="a-litany-28">
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXVIII</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span class="i1">Son of God, hear us, and since Thou</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By taking our blood, owest it us again,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Gain to Thyself, and us allow;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And let not both us and Thyself be slain;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i4">O Lamb of God, which took’st our sin,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i4">Which could not stick to Thee,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>O let it not return to us again;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But patient and physician being free,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As sin is nothing, let it nowhere be.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
			</article>
			<article id="upon-the-translation-of-the-psalms-by-sir-philip-sidney-and-the-countess-of-pembroke-his-sister" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Upon the Translation of the Psalms by Sir Philip Sidney, and the Countess of Pembroke, His Sister</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Eternal God⁠—for whom who ever dare</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Seek new expressions, do the circle square,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thrust into straight corners of poor wit</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thee, who art cornerless and infinite⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I would but bless Thy name, not name Thee now</span>
					<br/>
					<span>—And Thy gifts are as infinite as Thou⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fix we our praises therefore on this one,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That, as thy blessed Spirit fell upon</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These Psalms’ first author in a cloven tongue</span>
					<br/>
					<span>—For ’twas a double power by which he sung</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The highest matter in the noblest form⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So Thou hast cleft that Spirit, to performs</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That work again, and shed it here, upon</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Two, by their bloods, and by Thy Spirit one;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A brother and a sister, made by Thee</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The organ, where Thou art the harmony.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Two that make one John Baptist’s holy voice,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And who that Psalm, “Now let the Isles rejoice,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Have both translated, and applied it too,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Both told us what, and taught us how to do.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They show us islanders our Joy, our King;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They tell us why, and teach us how to sing.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Make all this all three choirs, heaven, earth, and spheres;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The first, Heaven, hath a song, but no man hears;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The spheres have music, but they have no tongue,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their harmony is rather danced than sung;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But our third choir, to which the first gives ear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>—For angels learn by what the Church does here⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This choir hath all. The organist is he</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who hath tuned God and man, the organ we;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The songs are these, which heaven’s high holy Muse</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whisper’d to David, David to the Jews;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And David’s successors in holy zeal,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In forms of joy and art do re-reveal</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To us so sweetly and sincerely too,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That I must not rejoice as I would do,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When I behold that these Psalms are become</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So well attired abroad, so ill at home,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So well in chambers, in Thy Church so ill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As I can scarce call that reform’d until</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This be reform’d; would a whole state present</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A lesser gift than some one man hath sent?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And shall our Church unto our Spouse and King</span>
					<br/>
					<span>More hoarse, more harsh than any other, sing?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For that we pray, we praise Thy name for this,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which, by this Moses and this Miriam, is</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Already done; and as those Psalms we call,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>—Though some have other authors⁠—David’s all,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So though some have, some may some Psalms translate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We Thy Sidneian psalms shall celebrate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, till we come th’ extemporal song to sing</span>
					<br/>
					<span>—Learn’d the first hour that we see the King,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who hath translated those translators⁠—may</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These their sweet learned labours all the way</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Be as our tuning, that when hence we part,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We may fall in with them, and sing our part!</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="ode" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<hgroup>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Ode</h3>
					<p hidden="hidden" epub:type="subtitle">Vengeance Will Sit Above Our Faults; But Till</p>
				</hgroup>
				<section id="ode-1">
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Vengeance will sit above our faults; but till</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i4">She there do sit,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>We see her not, nor them. Thus, blind, yet still</span>
						<br/>
						<span>We lead her way; and thus, whilst we do ill,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i4">We suffer it.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="ode-2">
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Unhappy he whom youth makes not beware</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i4">Of doing ill.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Enough we labour under age, and care;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In number, th’ errors of the last place are</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i4">The greatest still.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="ode-3">
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Yet we, that should the ill we now begin</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i4">As soon repent,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Strange thing! perceive not; our faults are not seen,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But past us; neither felt, but only in</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i4">The punishment.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="ode-4">
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>But we know ourselves least; mere outward shows</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i4">Our minds so store,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That our souls no more than our eyes disclose</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But form and colour. Only he who knows</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i4">Himself, knows more.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
			</article>
			<article id="to-mr-tilman-after-he-had-taken-orders" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">To <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Tilman After He Had Taken Orders</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Thou, whose diviner soul hath caused thee now</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To put thy hand unto the holy plough,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Making lay-scornings of the ministry</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not an impediment, but victory;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What bring’st thou home with thee? how is thy mind</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Affected since the vintage? Dost thou find</span>
					<br/>
					<span>New thoughts and stirrings in thee? and, as steel</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Touch’d with a loadstone, dost new motions feel?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or, as a ship after much pain and care</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For iron and cloth brings home rich Indian ware,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hast thou thus traffick’d, but with far more gain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of noble goods, and with less time and pain?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou art the same materials, as before,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Only the stamp is changed, but no more.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And as new crowned kings alter the face,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But not the money’s substance, so hath grace</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Changed only God’s old image by creation,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To Christ’s new stamp, at this thy coronation;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or, as we paint angels with wings, because</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They bear God’s message and proclaim His laws,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Since thou must do the like and so must move,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Art thou new feather’d with celestial love?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dear, tell me where thy purchase lies, and show</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What thy advantage is above, below.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But if thy gainings do surmount expression,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Why doth the foolish world scorn that profession,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose joys pass speech? Why do they think unfit</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That gentry should join families with it?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As if their day were only to be spent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In dressing, mistressing and compliment.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Alas! poor joys, but poorer men, whose trust</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Seems richly placed in sublimèd dust,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>—For such are clothes and beauty, which though gay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Are, at the best, but of sublimèd clay⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let then the world thy calling disrespect,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But go thou on, and pity their neglect.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What function is so noble, as to be</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ambassador to God, and destiny?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To open life? to give kingdoms to more</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than kings give dignities? to keep heaven’s door?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mary’s prerogative was to bear Christ, so</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Tis preachers’ to convey Him, for they do,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As angels out of clouds, from pulpits speak;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And bless the poor beneath, the lame, the weak.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If then th’ astronomers, whereas they spy</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A new-found star, their optics magnify,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How brave are those, who with their engine can</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bring man to heaven, and heaven again to man?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These are thy titles and pre-eminences,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In whom must meet God’s graces, men’s offences;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And so the heavens which beget all things here,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And th’ earth, our mother, which these things doth bear;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Both these in thee, are in thy calling knit!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“And make thee now a blest hermaphrodite.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="a-hymn-to-christ-at-the-authors-last-going-into-germany" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">A Hymn to Christ, at the Author’s Last Going Into Germany</h3>
				<p>
					<span>In what torn ship so ever I embark,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That ship shall be my emblem of Thy ark;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What sea soever swallow me, that flood</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall be to me an emblem of Thy blood;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though Thou with clouds of anger do disguise</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy face, yet through that mask I know those eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which, though they turn away sometimes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">They never will despise.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>I sacrifice this island unto Thee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all whom I love there, and who love me;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When I have put our seas ’twixt them and me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Put thou Thy seas betwixt my sins and Thee.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As the tree’s sap doth seek the root below</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In winter, in my winter now I go,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where none but Thee, the eternal root</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Of true love, I may know.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Nor Thou nor Thy religion dost control</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The amorousness of an harmonious soul;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But Thou wouldst have that love Thyself; as Thou</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Art jealous, Lord, so I am jealous now;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou lovest not, till from loving more Thou free</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My soul; Who ever gives, takes liberty;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Oh, if Thou carest not whom I love,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Alas! Thou lovest not me.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Seal then this bill of my divorce to all,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On whom those fainter beams of love did fall;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Marry those loves, which in youth scatter’d be</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On fame, wit, hopes⁠—false mistresses⁠—to Thee.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Churches are best for prayer, that have least light;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To see God only, I go out of sight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to escape stormy days, I choose</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">An everlasting night.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="the-lamentations-of-jeremy-for-the-most-part-according-to-tremellius" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">The Lamentations of Jeremy, for the Most Part According to Tremellius</h3>
				<section id="the-lamentations-of-jeremy-for-the-most-part-according-to-tremellius-1" epub:type="chapter">
					<h4>
						<span epub:type="label">Chapter</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</span>
					</h4>
					<p>
						<span>1. How sits this city, late most populous,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thus solitary, and like a widow thus?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Amplest of nations, queen of provinces</span>
						<br/>
						<span>She was, who now thus tributary is?</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>2. Still in the night she weeps, and her tears fall</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Down by her cheeks along, and none of all</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Her lovers comfort her; perfidiously</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Her friends have dealt, and now are enemy</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>3. Unto great bondage, and afflictions,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Judah is captive led; those nations</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With whom she dwells, no place of rest afford;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In straits she meets her persecutors’ sword.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>4. Empty are the gates of Sion, and her ways</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Mourn, because none come to her solemn days.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Her priests do groan, her maids are comfortless;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And she’s unto herself a bitterness.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>5. Her foes are grown her head, and live at peace,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Because, when her transgressions did increase,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The Lord strook her with sadness; the enemy</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Doth drive her children to captivity.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>6. From Sion’s daughter is all beauty gone;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Like harts which seek for pasture, and find none,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Her princes are; and now before the foe</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Which still pursues them, without strength they go.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>7. Now in their days of tears, Jerusalem</span>
						<br/>
						<span>—Her men slain by the foe, none succouring them⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Remembers what of old she esteemed most,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Whiles her foes laugh at her, for what she hath lost.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>8. Jerusalem hath sinn’d, therefore is she</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Removed, as women in uncleanness be;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Who honour’d, scorn her, for her foulness they</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Have seen; herself doth groan, and turn away.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>9. Her foulness in her skirts was seen, yet she</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Remember’d not her end; miraculously</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Therefore she fell, none comforting; behold,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>O Lord, my affliction, for the foe grows bold.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>10. Upon all things where her delight hath been,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The foe hath stretch’d his hand, for she hath seen</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Heathen, whom thou command’st should not do so,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Into her holy sanctuary go.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>11. And all her people groan, and seek for bread;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And they have given, only to be fed,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>All precious things, wherein their pleasure lay;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>How cheap I’m grown, O Lord, behold, and weigh.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>12. All this concerns not you, who pass by me;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>O see, and mark if any sorrow be</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Like to my sorrow, which Jehovah hath</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Done to me in the day of His fierce wrath?</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>13. That fire, which by Himself is governed,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He hath cast from heaven on my bones, and spread</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A net before my feet, and me o’erthrown,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And made me languish all the day alone.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>14. His hand hath of my sins framèd a yoke</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Which wreathed, and cast upon my neck, hath broke</span>
						<br/>
						<span>My strength; the Lord unto those enemies</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Hath given me, from whom I cannot rise.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>15. He under foot hath trodden in my sight</span>
						<br/>
						<span>My strong men; He did company accite</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To break my young men; He the winepress hath</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Trod upon Judah’s daughter in His wrath.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>16. For these things do I weep; mine eye, mine eye</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Casts water out; for He which should be nigh</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To comfort me, is now departed far;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The foe prevails, forlorn my children are.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>17. There’s none, though Sion do stretch out her hand,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To comfort her; it is the Lord’s command</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That Jacob’s foes girt him; Jerusalem</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Is as an unclean woman amongst them.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>18. But yet the Lord is just, and righteous still;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I have rebell’d against His holy will;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>O hear all people, and my sorrow see,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>My maids, my young men in captivity.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>19. I called for my lovers then, but they</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Deceived me, and my priests, and elders lay</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Dead in the city; for they sought for meat</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Which should refresh their souls, and none could get.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>20. Because I am in straits, Jehovah, see!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>My heart o’erturn’a, my bowels muddy be;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Because I have rebell’d so much, as fast</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The sword without, as death within, doth waste.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>21. Of all which here I mourn, none comforts me;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>My foes have heard my grief, and glad they be,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That Thou hast done it; but Thy, promised day</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Will come, when, as I suffer, so shall they.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>22. Let all their wickedness appear to Thee;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Do unto them, as Thou hast done to me,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For all my sins; the sighs which I have had</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Are very many, and my heart is sad.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="the-lamentations-of-jeremy-for-the-most-part-according-to-tremellius-2" epub:type="chapter">
					<h4>
						<span epub:type="label">Chapter</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</span>
					</h4>
					<p>
						<span>1. How over Sion’s daughter hath God hung</span>
						<br/>
						<span>His wrath’s thick cloud? and from heaven hath flung</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To earth the beauty of Israel, and hath</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Forgot His foot-stool in the day of wrath?</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>2. The Lord unsparingly hath swallowed</span>
						<br/>
						<span>All Jacob’s dwellings, and demolished</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To ground the strength of Judah, and profaned</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The Princes of the kingdom, and the land.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>3. In heat of wrath the horn of Israel He</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Hath clean cut off, and lest the enemy</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Be hinder’d, His right hand He doth retire,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But is towards Jacob all-devouring fire.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>4. Like to an enemy He bent His bow;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>His right hand was in posture of a foe,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To kill what Sion’s daughter did desire,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>’Gainst whom His wrath He poured forth like fire.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>5. For like an enemy Jehovah is,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Devouring Israel, and his palaces,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Destroying holds, giving additions</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To Judah’s daughters’ lamentations.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>6. Like to a garden hedge He hath cast down</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The place where was His congregation,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And Sion’s feasts and sabbaths are forgot;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Her King, her Priest, His wrath regardeth not.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>7. The Lord forsakes His altar, and detests</span>
						<br/>
						<span>His sanctuary, and in the foes’ hands rests</span>
						<br/>
						<span>His palace, and the walls, in which their cries</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Are heard, as in the true solemnities.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>8. The Lord hath cast a line, so to confound</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And level Sion’s walls unto the ground;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He draws not back His hand, which doth o’erturn</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The wall, and rampart, which together mourn.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>9. Their gates are sunk into the ground, and He</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Hath broke the bar; their king and princes be</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Amongst the heathen, without law, nor there</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Unto their prophets doth the Lord appear.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>10. There Sion’s elders on the ground are placed,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And silence keep; dust on their heads they cast;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In sackcloth have they girt themselves, and low</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The virgins towards ground their heads do throw.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>11. My bowels are grown muddy, and mine eyes</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Are faint with weeping; and my liver lies</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Pour’d out upon the ground, for misery</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That sucking children in the streets do die.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>12. When they had cried unto their mothers, “Where</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Shall we have bread, and drink?” they fainted there,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And in the street like wounded persons lay,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Till ’twixt their mothers’ breasts they went away.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>13. Daughter Jerusalem, O what may be</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A witness, or comparison for thee?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Sion, to ease thee, what shall I name like thee?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thy breach is like the sea; what help can be?</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>14. For thee vain foolish things thy prophets sought;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thee, thine iniquities they have not taught,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Which might disturb thy bondage; but for thee</span>
						<br/>
						<span>False burthens, and false causes they would see.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>15. The passengers do clap their hands, and hiss</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And wag their head at thee, and say, “Is this</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That city, which so many men did call</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Joy of the earth, and perfectest of all?”</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>16. Thy foes do gape upon thee, and they hiss,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And gnash their teeth, and say, “Devour we this,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For this is certainly the day which we</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Expected, and which now we find, and see.”</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>17. The Lord hath done that which He purposèd;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Fulfill’d His word of old determinèd;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He hath thrown down, and not spared, and thy foe</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Made glad above thee, and advanced him so.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>18. But now their hearts unto the Lord do call;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Therefore, O walls of Sion, let tears fall</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Down like a river, day and night; take thee</span>
						<br/>
						<span>No rest, but let thine eye incessant be.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>19. Arise, cry in the night, pour out thy sins,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thy heart, like water, when the watch begins</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Lift up thy hands to God, lest children die,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Which, faint for hunger, in the streets do lie.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>20. Behold, O Lord, consider unto whom</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thou hast done this; what, shall the women come</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To eat their children of a span? shall Thy</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Prophet and priest be slain in sanctuary?</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>21. On ground in streets the young and old do lie;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>My virgins and young men by sword do die;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Them in the day of Thy wrath Thou hast slain;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Nothing did Thee from killing them contain.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>22. As to a solemn feast, all whom I fear’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thou call’st about me; when Thy wrath appear’d,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>None did remain or scape, for those which I</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Brought up, did perish by mine enemy.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="the-lamentations-of-jeremy-for-the-most-part-according-to-tremellius-3" epub:type="chapter">
					<h4>
						<span epub:type="label">Chapter</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</span>
					</h4>
					<p>
						<span>1. I am the man which have affliction seen,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Under the rod of God’s wrath having been;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>2. He hath led me to darkness, not to light,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>3. And against me all day, His hand doth fight.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>4. He hath broke my bones, worn out my flesh and skin,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>5. Built up against me; and hath girt me in</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With hemlock, and with labour; 6. And set me</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In dark, as they who dead for ever be.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>7. He hath hedged me lest I ‘scape, and added more</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To my steel fetters heavier than before.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>8. When I cry out He outshuts my prayer; 9. And hath</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Stopp’d with hewn stone my way, and turn’d my path.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>10. And like a lion hid in secrecy,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or bear which lies in wait, He was to me.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>11. He stops my way, tears me, made desolate;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>12. And He makes me the mark He shooteth at.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>13. He made the children of His quiver pass</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Into my reins. 14. I, with my people, was</span>
						<br/>
						<span>All the day long, a song and mockery.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>15. He hath fill’d me with bitterness, and He</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Hath made me drunk with wormwood. 16. He hath burst</span>
						<br/>
						<span>My teeth with stones, and cover’d me with dust.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>17. And thus my soul far off from peace was set,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And my prosperity I did forget.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>18. My strength, my hope⁠—unto myself I said⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Which from the Lord should come, is perished:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>19. But when my mournings I do think upon,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>My wormwood, hemlock, and affliction,</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>20. My soul is humbled in rememb’ring this;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>21. My heart considers, therefore, hope there is.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>22. ’Tis God’s great mercy we’re not utterly</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Consumed, for His compassions do not die;</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>23. For every morning they renewed be,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For great, O Lord, is Thy fidelity.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>24. The Lord is⁠—saith my soul⁠—my portion,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And therefore in Him will I hope alone.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>25. The Lord is good to them, who on Him rely,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And to the soul that seeks Him earnestly.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>26. It is both good to trust, and to attend</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The Lord’s salvation unto the end.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>27. ’Tis good for one His yoke in youth to bear.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>28. He sits alone, and doth all speech forbear,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Because he hath borne it. 29. And his mouth he lays</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Deep in the dust, yet then in hope he stays.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>30. He gives his cheeks to whosoever will</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Strike him, and so he is reproached still.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>31. For not for ever doth the Lord forsake;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>32. But when He hath struck with sadness, He doth take</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Compassion, as His mercy’s infinite;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>33. Nor is it with His heart, that He doth smite,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>34. That underfoot the prisoners stamped be,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>35. That a man’s right the judge himself doth see</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>To be wrung from him; 36. That he subverted is</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In his just cause, the Lord allows not this.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>37. Who then will say, that aught doth come to pass,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But that which by the Lord commanded was?</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>38. Both good and evil from His mouth proceeds;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>39. Why then grieves any man for his misdeeds?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>40. Turn we to God, by trying out our ways;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>41. To Him in heav’n our hands with hearts upraise.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>42. We have rebell’d, and fallen away from Thee;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thou pardon’st not; 43. Usest no clemency;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>125 Pursuest us, kill’st us, cover’st us with wrath;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>44. Cover’st Thyself with clouds, that our prayer hath</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>No power to pass. 45. And Thou hast made us fall</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As refuse, and off-scouring to them all.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>46. All our foes gape at us. 47. Fear and a snare</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With ruin, and with waste upon us are.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>48. With watery rivers doth mine eye o’erflow</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For ruin of my people’s daughters so;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>49. Mine eye doth drop down tears incessantly,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>50. Until the Lord look down from heav’n to see.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>51. And for my city daughters’ sake, mine eye</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Doth break mine heart. 52. Causeless mine enemy</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Like a bird chased me. 53. In a dungeon</span>
						<br/>
						<span>They’ve shut my life, and cast me on a stone.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>54. Waters flow’d o’er my head; then thought I, I am</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Destroy’d; 55. I called, Lord, upon Thy name</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Out of the pit; 56. And Thou my voice didst hear;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>129 O from my sigh and cry, stop not Thine ear.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>57. Then when I call’d upon Thee, Thou drew’st near</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Unto me, and said’st unto me, “Do not fear.”</span>
						<br/>
						<span>58. Thou, Lord, my soul’s cause handled hast, and Thou</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Rescuest my life. 59. O Lord, do Thou judge now.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Thou heardst my wrong, 60. Their vengeance, all they’ve wrought;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>61. How they reproach’d, Thou’st heard, and what they thought;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>62. What their lips utter’d, which against me rose,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And what was ever whisper’d by my foes.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>63. I am their song, whether they rise or sit;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>64. Give them rewards, Lord, for their working fit,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>65. Sorrow of heart, Thy curse; 66. And with Thy might</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Follow, and from under heaven destroy them quite.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="the-lamentations-of-jeremy-for-the-most-part-according-to-tremellius-4" epub:type="chapter">
					<h4>
						<span epub:type="label">Chapter</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</span>
					</h4>
					<p>
						<span>1. How is the gold become so dim? How is</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Purest and finest gold thus changed to this?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The stones which were stones of the sanctuary,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Scatter’d in corners of each street do lie.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>2. The precious sons of Sion, which should be</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Valued at purest gold, how do we see</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Low rated now, as earthen pitchers, stand,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Which are the work of a poor potter’s hand?</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>3. Even the sea-calfs draw their breasts, and give</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Suck to their young; my people’s daughters live,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By reason of the foes’ great cruelness,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As do the owls in the vast wilderness.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>4. And when the sucking child doth strive to draw,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>His tongue for thirst cleaves to his upper jaw;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And when for bread the children cry,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>There is no man that doth them satisfy.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>5. They which before were delicately fed,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Now in the streets forlorn have perished;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And they which ever were in scarlet clothed,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Sit and embrace the dunghills which they loathed.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>6. The daughters of my people have sinn’d more,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Than did the town of Sodom sin before;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Which being at once destroy’d, there did remain</span>
						<br/>
						<span>No hands amongst them to vex them again.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>7. But heretofore, purer her Nazarite</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Was than the snow, and milk was not so white;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As carbuncles did their pure bodies shine,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And all their polish’dness was sapphirine.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>8. They’re darker now than blackness; none can know</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Them by the face, as through the street they go;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For now their skin doth cleave unto their bone,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And withered, is like to dry wood grown.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>9. Better by sword than famine ’tis to die;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And better through-pierced, than through penury.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>10. Women, by nature pitiful, have eat</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Their children⁠—dress’d with their own hand⁠—for meat.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>11. Jehovah here fully accomplish’d hath</span>
						<br/>
						<span>His indignation, and pour’d forth His wrath;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Kindled a fire in Sion, which hath power</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To eat, and her foundations to devour.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>12. Nor would the kings of th’ earth, nor all which live</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In the inhabitable world believe,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That any adversary, any foe,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Into Jerusalem should enter so.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>13. For the priests’ sins, and prophets’, which have shed</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Blood in the streets and the just murdered;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>14. Which, when those men whom they made blind did stray</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thorough the streets, defiled by the way</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>With blood, the which impossible it was</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Their garment should ‘scape touching, as they pass,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>15. Would cry aloud, “Depart, defilèd men,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Depart, depart, and touch not us!” and then</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>They fled, and stray’d, and with the Gentiles were;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Yet told their friends, they should not long dwell there.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>16. For this they’re scatter’d by Jehovah’s face,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Who never will regard them more; no grace</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Unto their old men shall the foe afford;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Nor, that they’re priests, redeem them from the sword.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>17. And we as yet, for all these miseries</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Desiring our vain help, consume our eyes.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>And such a nation as cannot save,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>We in desire and speculation have;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>18. They hunt our steps, that in the streets we fear</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To go; our end is now approached near.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Our days accomplish’d are; this the last day;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Eagles of heav’n are not so swift as they</span>
						<br/>
						<span>19. Which follow us; o’er mountain tops they fly</span>
						<br/>
						<span>At us, and for us in the desert lie.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>20. Th’ Anointed Lord, breath of our nostrils, He</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of whom we said, under His shadow we</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Shall with more ease under the heathen dwell,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Into the pit which these men digged, fell.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>21. Rejoice, O Edom’s daughter, joyful be</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thou that inhabit’st Uz, for unto thee</span>
						<br/>
						<span>This cup shall pass, and thou with drunkenness</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Shalt fill thyself, and show thy nakedness.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>22. Then thy sins, O Sion, shall be spent,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The Lord will not leave thee in banishment.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thy sins, O Edom’s daughter, He will see,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And for them, pay thee with captivity.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="the-lamentations-of-jeremy-for-the-most-part-according-to-tremellius-5" epub:type="chapter">
					<h4>
						<span epub:type="label">Chapter</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">V</span>
					</h4>
					<p>
						<span>1. Remember, O Lord, what is fall’n on us;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>See, and mark how we are reproached thus;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>2. For unto strangers our possession</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Is turn’d, our houses unto aliens gone.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>3. Our mothers are become as widows; we</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As orphans all, and without fathers be,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>4. Waters which are our own, we drink and pay;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And upon our own wood a price they lay.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>5. Our persecutors on our necks do sit;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>They make us travail, and not intermit;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>6. We stretch our hands unto th’ Egyptians</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To get us bread; and to th’ Assyrians.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>7. Our fathers did these sins, and are no more;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But we do bear the sins they did before.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>8. They are but servants, which do rule us thus,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Yet from their hands none would deliver us.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>9. With danger of our life our bread we gat;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For in the wilderness the sword did wait.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>10. The tempests of this famine we lived in,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Black as an oven colour’d had our skin.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>11. In Judah’s cities they the maids abused</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By force, and so women in Sion used.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>12. The princes with their hands they hung; no grace</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Nor honour gave they to the elder’s face.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>13. Unto the mill our young men carried are,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And children fell under the wood they bare.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>14. Elders the gates, youth did their songs forbear;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Gone was our joy; our dancings, mournings were.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>15. Now is the crown fall’n from our head; and woe</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Be unto us, because we’ve sinnèd so.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>16. For this our hearts do languish, and for this</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Over our eyes a cloudy dimness is.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>17. Because Mount Sion desolate doth lie,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And foxes there do go at liberty;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>18. But Thou, O Lord, art ever, and Thy throne</span>
						<br/>
						<span>From generation to generation.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>19. Why shouldst Thou forget us eternally?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or leave us thus long in this misery?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>20. Restore us, Lord, to Thee, that so we may</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Return, and as of old, renew our day.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>21. For oughtest Thou, O Lord, despise us thus,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And to be utterly enraged at us?</span>
					</p>
				</section>
			</article>
			<article id="hymn-to-god-my-god-in-my-sickness" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Hymn to God, My God, in My Sickness</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Since I am coming to that Holy room,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where, with Thy choir of saints for evermore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I shall be made Thy music; as I come</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I tune the instrument here at the door,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And what I must do then, think here before;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Whilst my physicians by their love are grown</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Cosmographers, and I their map, who lie</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Flat on this bed, that by them may be shown</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That this is my south-west discovery,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1"><i xml:lang="la">Per fretum febris</i>, by these straits to die;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>I joy, that in these straits I see my west;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For, though those currents yield return to none,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What shall my west hurt me? As west and east</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In all flat maps⁠—and I am one⁠—are one,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So death doth touch the resurrection.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Is the Pacific sea my home? Or are</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The eastern riches? Is Jerusalem?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Anyan, and Magellan, and Gibraltar?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All straits, and none but straits, are ways to them</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whether where Japhet dwelt, or Cham, or Shem.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>We think that Paradise and Calvary,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Christ’s cross and Adam’s tree, stood in one place;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Look, Lord, and find both Adams met in me;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As the first Adam’s sweat surrounds my face,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">May the last Adam’s blood my soul embrace.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So, in His purple wrapp’d, receive me, Lord;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By these His thorns, give me His other crown;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And as to others’ souls I preach’d Thy word,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Be this my text, my sermon to mine own,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Therefore that He may raise, the Lord throws down.”</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="a-hymn-to-god-the-father" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">A Hymn to God the Father</h3>
				<section id="a-hymn-to-god-the-father-1">
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Wilt Thou forgive that sin where I begun,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Which was my sin, though it were done before?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Wilt Thou forgive that sin, through which I run,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And do run still, though still I do deplore?</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">When Thou hast done, Thou hast not done,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i5">For I have more.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="a-hymn-to-god-the-father-2">
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Wilt Thou forgive that sin which I have won</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Others to sin, and made my sin their door?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Wilt Thou forgive that sin which I did shun</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">A year or two, but wallowed in a score?</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">When Thou hast done, Thou hast not done,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i5">For I have more.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="a-hymn-to-god-the-father-3">
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>I have a sin of fear, that when I have spun</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">My last thread, I shall perish on the shore;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But swear by Thyself, that at my death Thy Son</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Shall shine as he shines now, and heretofore;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">And, having done that, Thou hast done;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i5">I fear no more.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
			</article>
		</article>
	</body>
</html>
