<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Elegies</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<article id="elegies" epub:type="part">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Elegies</h2>
			<section id="elegy-1" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<hgroup>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Elegy</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</span>
					</h3>
					<p epub:type="title">Jealousy</p>
				</hgroup>
				<p>
					<span>Fond woman, which wouldst have thy husband die,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And yet complain’st of his great jealousy;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If, swollen with poison, he lay in his last bed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His body with a sere bark covered,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Drawing his breath as thick and short as can</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The nimblest crocheting musician,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ready with loathsome vomiting to spew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His soul out of one hell into a new,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Made deaf with his poor kindred’s howling cries,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Begging with few feign’d tears great legacies⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou wouldst not weep, but jolly, and frolic be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As a slave, which to-morrow should be free.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet weep’st thou, when thou seest him hungerly</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Swallow his own death, heart’s-bane jealousy?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O give him many thanks, he’s courteous,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That in suspecting kindly warneth us.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We must not, as we used, flout openly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In scoffing riddles, his deformity;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor at his board together being sat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With words, nor touch, scarce looks, adulterate.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor when he, swollen and pamper’d with great fare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sits down and snorts, caged in his basket chair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Must we usurp his own bed any more,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor kiss and play in his house, as before.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now I see many dangers; for it is</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His realm, his castle, and his diocese.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But if⁠—as envious men, which would revile</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their prince, or coin his gold, themselves exile</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into another country, and do it there⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We play in another house, what should we fear?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There we will scorn his household policies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His silly plots, and pensionary spies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As the inhabitants of Thames’ right side</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Do London’s mayor, or Germans the Pope’s pride.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="elegy-2" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<hgroup>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Elegy</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</span>
					</h3>
					<p epub:type="title">The Anagram</p>
				</hgroup>
				<p>
					<span>Marry, and love thy Flavia, for she</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hath all things, whereby others beauteous be;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For, though her eyes be small, her mouth is great;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though they be ivory, yet her teeth be jet;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though they be dim, yet she is light enough;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And though her harsh hair fall, her skin is tough;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What though her cheeks be yellow, her hair’s red,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Give her thine, and she hath a maidenhead.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These things are beauty’s elements; where these</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Meet in one, that one must, as perfect, please.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If red and white, and each good quality</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Be in thy wench, ne’er ask where it doth lie.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In buying things perfumed, we ask, if there</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Be musk and amber in it, but not where.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though all her parts be not in th’ usual place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She hath yet an anagram of a good face.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If we might put the letters but one way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In that lean dearth of words, what could we say?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When by the gamut some musicians make</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A perfect song, others will undertake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By the same gamut changed, to equal it.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Things simply good can never be unfit;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She’s fair as any, if all be like her;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And if none be, then she is singular.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All love is wonder; if we justly do</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Account her wonderful, why not lovely too?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Love built on beauty, soon as beauty, dies;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Choose this face, changed by no deformities.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Women are all like angels; the fair be</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like those which fell to worse; but such as she,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like to good angels, nothing can impair:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Tis less grief to be foul, than to have been fair.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For one night’s revels, silk and gold we choose,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But, in long journeys, cloth, and leather use.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beauty is barren oft; best husbands say</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There is best land, where there is foulest way.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Oh, what a sovereign plaster will she be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If thy past sins have taught thee jealousy!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Here needs no spies, nor eunuchs; her commit</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Safe to thy foes, yea, to a marmoset.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like Belgia’s cities the round country drowns,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That dirty foulness guards and arms the towns,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So doth her face guard her; and so, for thee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which forced by business, absent oft must be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She, whose face, like clouds, turns the day to night;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who, mightier than the sea, makes Moors seem white;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who, though seven years she in the stews had laid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A nunnery durst receive, and think a maid;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And though in childbed’s labour she did lie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Midwives would swear, ’twere but a tympany;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whom, if she accuse herself, I credit less</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than witches, which impossibles confess;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One like none, and liked of none, fittest were;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For things in fashion every man will wear.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="elegy-3" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<hgroup>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Elegy</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</span>
					</h3>
					<p epub:type="title">Change</p>
				</hgroup>
				<p>
					<span>Although thy hand and faith, and good works too,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Have seal’d thy love which nothing should undo,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yea, though thou fall back, that apostasy</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Confirm thy love, yet much, much I fear thee.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Women are like the arts, forced unto none,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Open to all searchers, unprized, if unknown.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If I have caught a bird, and let him fly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Another fowler using these means, as I,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>May catch the same bird; and, as these things be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Women are made for men, not him nor me.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Foxes, and goats⁠—all beasts⁠—change when they please.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall women, more hot, wily, wild than these,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Be bound to one man, and did nature then</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Idly make them apter to endure than men?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They’re our clogs, not their own; if a man be</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Chain’d to a galley, yet the galley’s free.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who hath a plough-land, casts all his seed corn there,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And yet allows his ground more corn should bear;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though Danuby into the sea must flow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The sea receives the Rhine, Volga, and Po.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By nature, which gave it, this liberty</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou lovest, but O! canst thou love it and me?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Likeness glues love; and if that thou so do,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To make us like and love, must I change too?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>More than thy hate, I hate it; rather let me</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Allow her change, then change as oft as she,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And so not teach, but force my opinion,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To love not any one, nor every one.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To live in one land is captivity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To run all countries a wild roguery.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Waters stink soon, if in one place they bide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in the vast sea are more putrified;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But when they kiss one bank, and leaving this</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Never look back, but the next bank do kiss,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then are they purest; change is the nursery</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of music, joy, life, and eternity.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="elegy-4" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<hgroup>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Elegy</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</span>
					</h3>
					<p epub:type="title">The Perfume</p>
				</hgroup>
				<p>
					<span>Once, and but once, found in thy company,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All thy supposed escapes are laid on me;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And as a thief at bar is question’d there</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By all the men that have been robb’d that year,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So am I⁠—by this traitorous means surprized⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By thy hydroptic father catechized.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though he had wont to search with glazèd eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As though he came to kill a cockatrice;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though he hath oft sworn that he would remove</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy beauty’s beauty, and food of our love,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hope of his goods, if I with thee were seen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet close and secret, as our souls, we’ve been.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though thy immortal mother, which doth lie</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Still buried in her bed, yet will not die,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Takes this advantage to sleep out daylight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And watch thy entries and returns all night;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, when she takes thy hand, and would seem kind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Doth search what rings and armlets she can find;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And kissing notes the colour of thy face;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And fearing lest thou’rt swollen, doth thee embrace;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to try if thou long, doth name strange meats;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And notes thy paleness, blushing, sighs, and sweats;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And politicly will to thee confess</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The sins of her own youth’s rank lustiness;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet love these sorceries did remove, and move</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thee to gull thine own mother for my love.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy little brethren, which like fairy sprites</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Oft skipp’d into our chamber, those sweet nights,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And kiss’d, and ingled on thy father’s knee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Were bribed next day to tell what they did see;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The grim-eight-foot-high-iron-bound serving-man,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That oft names God in oaths, and only then,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He that, to bar the first gate, doth as wide</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As the great Rhodian Colossus stride</span>
					<br/>
					<span>—Which, if in hell no other pains there were,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Makes me fear hell, because he must be there⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though by thy father he were hired to this,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Could never witness any touch or kiss.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But O! too common ill, I brought with me</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That, which betray’d me to mine enemy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A loud perfume, which at my entrance cried</span>
					<br/>
					<span>E’en at thy father’s nose; so were we spied.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When, like a tyrant king, that in his bed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Smelt gunpowder, the pale wretch shivered,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had it been some bad smell, he would have thought</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That his own feet, or breath, that smell had wrought;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But as we in our isle imprisoned,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where cattle only and divers dogs are bred,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The precious unicorns strange monsters call,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So thought he good strange, that had none at all.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I taught my silks their whistling to forbear;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Even my oppress’d shoes dumb and speechless were;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Only thou bitter-sweet, whom I had laid</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Next me, me traitorously hast betray’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And unsuspected hast invisibly</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At once fled unto him, and stay’d with me.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Base excrement of earth, which dost confound</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sense from distinguishing the sick from sound!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By thee the silly amorous sucks his death</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By drawing in a leprous harlot’s breath;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By thee, the greatest stain to man’s estate</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Falls on us, to be call’d effeminate;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though you be much loved in the prince’s hall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There things that seem exceed substantial;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gods, when ye fumed on altars, were pleased well,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Because you were burnt, not that they liked your smell;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>You’re loathsome all, being taken simply alone;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall we love ill things join’d, and hate each one?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If you were good, your good doth soon decay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And you are rare; that takes the good away:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And my perfumes I give most willingly</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To embalm thy father’s corpse; what? will he die?</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="elegy-5" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<hgroup>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Elegy</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">V</span>
					</h3>
					<p epub:type="title">His Picture</p>
				</hgroup>
				<p>
					<span>Here take my picture; though I bid farewell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thine, in my heart, where my soul dwells, shall dwell.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Tis like me now, but I dead, ’twill be more,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When we are shadows both, than ’twas before.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When weatherbeaten I come back; my hand</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Perhaps with rude oars torn, or sun-beams tann’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My face and breast of haircloth, and my head</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With care’s harsh sudden hoariness o’erspread,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My body a sack of bones, broken within,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And powder’s blue stains scatter’d on my skin;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If rival fools tax thee to have loved a man,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So foul and coarse, as, O! I may seem then,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This shall say what I was; and thou shalt say,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Do his hurts reach me? doth my worth decay?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or do they reach his judging mind, that he</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Should now love less, what he did love to see?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That which in him was fair and delicate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was but the milk, which in love’s childish state</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Did nurse it; who now is grown strong enough</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To feed on that, which to weak tastes seems tough.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="elegy-6" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<hgroup>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Elegy</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VI</span>
					</h3>
					<p hidden="hidden" epub:type="title">O, Let Me Not Serve So, as Those Men Serve</p>
				</hgroup>
				<p>
					<span>O, let me not serve so, as those men serve,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whom honour’s smokes at once fatten and starve,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Poorly enrich’d with great men’s words or looks;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor so write my name in thy loving books</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As those idolatrous flatterers, which still</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their princes’ style with many realms fulfil,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whence they no tribute have, and where no sway.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such services I offer as shall pay</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Themselves; I hate dead names. O, then let me</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Favourite in ordinary, or no favourite be.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When my soul was in her own body sheathed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not yet by oaths betroth’d, nor kisses breathed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into my purgatory, faithless thee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy heart seemed wax, and steel thy constancy.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So careless flowers strew’d on the water’s face</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The curled whirlpools suck, smack, and embrace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet drown them; so the taper’s beamy eye</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Amorously twinkling beckons the giddy fly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet burns his wings; and such the devil is,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Scarce visiting them who are entirely his.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When I behold a stream, which from the spring</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Doth with doubtful melodious murmuring,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or in a speechless slumber, calmly ride</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her wedded channel’s bosom, and there chide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And bend her brows, and swell, if any bough</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Do but stoop down to kiss her utmost brow;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet, if her often gnawing kisses win</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The traitorous banks to gape, and let her in,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She rusheth violently, and doth divorce</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her from her native and her long-kept course,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And roars, and braves it, and in gallant scorn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In flattering eddies promising return,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She flouts her channel, which thenceforth is dry;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then say I; “That is she, and this am I.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet let not thy deep bitterness beget</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Careless despair in me, for that will whet</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My mind to scorn; and O, love dull’d with pain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was ne’er so wise, nor well arm’d, as disdain.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then with new eyes I shall survey thee, and spy</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Death in thy cheeks, and darkness in thine eye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though hope bred faith and love; thus taught, I shall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As nations do from Rome, from thy love fall;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My hate shall outgrow thine, and utterly</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I will renounce thy dalliance; and when I</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Am the recusant, in that resolute state</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What hurts it me to be excommunicate?</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="elegy-7" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<hgroup>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Elegy</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VII</span>
					</h3>
					<p hidden="hidden" epub:type="title">Nature’s Lay Idiot, I Taught Thee to Love</p>
				</hgroup>
				<p>
					<span>Nature’s lay idiot, I taught thee to love,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in that sophistry, O! thou dost prove</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Too subtle; fool, thou didst not understand</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The mystic language of the eye nor hand;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor couldst thou judge the difference of the air</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of sighs, and say, “This lies, this sounds despair”;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor by th’ eye’s water cast a malady</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Desperately hot, or changing feverously.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I had not taught thee then the alphabet</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of flowers, how they, devisefully being set</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And bound up, might with speechless secrecy</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Deliver errands mutely, and mutually.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Remember since all thy words used to be</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To every suitor, “Ay, if my friends agree;”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Since household charms, thy husband’s name to teach,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Were all the love-tricks that thy wit could reach;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And since an hour’s discourse could scarce have made</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One answer in thee, and that ill array’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In broken proverbs, and torn sentences.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou art not by so many duties his⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That from th’ world’s common having sever’d thee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Inlaid thee, neither to be seen, nor see⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As mine; who have with amorous delicacies</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Refined thee into a blissful paradise.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy graces and good works my creatures be;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I planted knowledge and life’s tree in thee;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which O! shall strangers taste? Must I, alas!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Frame and enamel plate, and drink in glass?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Chafe wax for other’s seals? break a colt’s force,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And leave him then, being made a ready horse?</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="elegy-8" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<hgroup>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Elegy</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VIII</span>
					</h3>
					<p epub:type="title">The Comparison</p>
				</hgroup>
				<p>
					<span>As the sweet sweat of roses in a still,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As that which from chafed musk cat’s pores doth trill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As the almighty balm of th’ early east,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such are the sweat drops of my mistress’ breast;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And on her neck her skin such lustre sets,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They seem no sweat drops, but pearl carcanets.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rank sweaty froth thy mistress’ brow defiles,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like spermatic issue of ripe menstruous boils,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or like the scum, which, by need’s lawless raw</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Enforced, Sanserra’s starvèd men did draw</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From parboil’d shoes and boots, and all the rest</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which were with any sovereign fatness blest;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And like vile lying stones in saffron’d tin,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or warts, or wheals, it hangs upon her skin.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Round as the world’s her head, on every side,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like to the fatal ball which fell on Ide;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or that whereof God had such jealousy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As for the ravishing thereof we die.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy head is like a rough-hewn statue of jet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where marks for eyes, nose, mouth, are yet scarce set;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like the first chaos, or flat seeming face</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Cynthia, when th’ earth’s shadows her embrace.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like Proserpine’s white beauty-keeping chest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or Jove’s best fortune’s urn, is her fair breast.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thine’s like worm-eaten trunks, clothed in seal’s skin,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or grave, that’s dust without, and stink within.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And like that slender stalk, at whose end stands</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The woodbine quivering, are her arms and hands.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like rough-bark’d elm-boughs, or the russet skin</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of men late scourged for madness, or for sin,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like sun-parch’d quarters on the city gate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such is thy tann’d skin’s lamentable state;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And like a bunch of ragged carrots stand</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The short swollen fingers of thy gouty hand.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then like the chemic’s masculine equal fire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which in the limbec’s warm womb doth inspire</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into th’ earth’s worthless dirt a soul of gold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such cherishing heat her best loved part doth hold.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thine’s like the dread mouth of a fired gun,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or like hot liquid metals newly run</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into clay moulds, or like to that Ætna,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where round about the grass is burnt away.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Are not your kisses then as filthy, and more,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As a worm sucking an envenom’d sore?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Doth not thy fearful hand in feeling quake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As one which gathering flowers still fears a snake?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is not your last act harsh and violent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As when a plough a stony ground doth rent?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So kiss good turtles, so devoutly nice</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Are priests in handling reverent sacrifice,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And nice in searching wounds the surgeon is,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As we, when we embrace, or touch, or kiss.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Leave her, and I will leave comparing thus,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She and comparisons are odious.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="elegy-9" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<hgroup>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Elegy</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IX</span>
					</h3>
					<p epub:type="title">The Autumnal</p>
				</hgroup>
				<p>
					<span>No spring, nor summer beauty hath such grace</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As I have seen in one autumnal face;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Young beauties force our love, and that’s a rape;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This doth but counsel, yet you cannot scape.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If ’twere a shame to love, here ’twere no shame;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Affections here take reverence’s name.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Were her first years the Golden Age? that’s true,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But now they’re gold oft tried, and ever new.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That was her torrid and inflaming time;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This is her tolerable tropic clime.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fair eyes; who asks more heat than comes from hence,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He in a fever wishes pestilence.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Call not these wrinkles, graves; if graves they were,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They were Love’s graves, for else he is nowhere.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet lies not Love dead here, but here doth sit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Vow’d to this trench, like an anachorite,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And here, till hers, which must be his death, come,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He doth not dig a grave, but build a tomb.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Here dwells he; though he sojourn everywhere</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In progress, yet his standing house is here;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Here, where still evening is, not noon, nor night;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where no voluptuousness, yet all delight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In all her words, unto all hearers fit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>You may at revels, you at council, sit.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This is love’s timber; youth his underwood;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There he, as wine in June, enrages blood;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which then comes seasonablest, when our taste</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And appetite to other things is past.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Xerxes’ strange Lydian love, the platane tree,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was loved for age, none being so large as she;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or else because, being young, nature did bless</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her youth with age’s glory, barrenness.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If we love things long sought, age is a thing</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which we are fifty years in compassing;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If transitory things, which soon decay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Age must be loveliest at the latest day.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But name not winter faces, whose skin’s slack,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lank as an unthrift’s purse, but a soul’s sack;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose eyes seek light within, for all here’s shade;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose mouths are holes, rather worn out, than made;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose every tooth to a several place is gone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To vex their souls at resurrection;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Name not these living death-heads unto me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For these, not ancient, but antique be.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I hate extremes; yet I had rather stay</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With tombs than cradles, to wear out a day.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Since such love’s motion natural is, may still</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My love descend, and journey down the hill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not panting after growing beauties; so</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I shall ebb out with them who homeward go.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="elegy-10" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<hgroup>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Elegy</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">X</span>
					</h3>
					<p epub:type="title">The Dream</p>
				</hgroup>
				<p>
					<span>Image of her whom I love, more than she,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose fair impression in my faithful heart</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Makes me her medal, and makes her love me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As kings do coins, to which their stamps impart</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The value; go, and take my heart from hence,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which now is grown too great and good for me.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Honours oppress weak spirits, and our sense</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Strong objects dull; the more, the less we see.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When you are gone, and reason gone with you,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then fantasy is queen and soul, and all;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She can present joys meaner than you do,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Convenient, and more proportional.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So, if I dream I have you, I have you,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For all our joys are but fantastical;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And so I ’scape the pain, for pain is true;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And sleep, which locks up sense, doth lock out all.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>After a such fruition I shall wake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, but the waking, nothing shall repent;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And shall to love more thankful sonnets make,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Than if more honour, tears, and pains were spent.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But, dearest heart and dearer image, stay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Alas! true joys at best are dream enough;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though you stay here, you pass too fast away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For even at first life’s taper is a snuff.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fill’d with her love, may I be rather grown</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Mad with much heart, than idiot with none.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="elegy-11" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<header>
					<hgroup>
						<h3>
							<span epub:type="label">Elegy</span>
							<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XI</span>
						</h3>
						<p epub:type="title">The Bracelet</p>
					</hgroup>
					<p epub:type="bridgehead">Upon the loss of his mistress’s chain, for which he made satisfaction.</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Not that in colour it was like thy hair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For armlets of that thou mayst let me wear;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor that thy hand it oft embraced and kiss’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For so it had that good, which oft I miss’d;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor for that silly old morality,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That, as these links were knit, our love should be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mourn I that I thy sevenfold chain have lost;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor for the luck sake; but the bitter cost.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O, shall twelve righteous angels, which as yet</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No leaven of vile solder did admit;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor yet by any way have stray’d or gone</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From the first state of their creation;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Angels, which heaven commanded to provide</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All things to me, and be my faithful guide;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To gain new friends, to appease great enemies;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To comfort my soul, when I lie or rise;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall these twelve innocents, by thy severe</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sentence, dread judge, my sin’s great burden bear?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall they be damn’d, and in the furnace thrown,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And punish’d for offences not their own?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They save not me, they do not ease my pains,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When in that hell they’re burnt and tied in chains.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Were they but crowns of France, I carèd not,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For most of these their country’s natural rot,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I think, possesseth; they come here to us</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So pale, so lame, so lean, so ruinous.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And howsoe’er French kings most Christian be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their crowns are circumcised most Jewishly.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or were they Spanish stamps, still travelling,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That are become as Catholic as their king;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Those unlick’d bear-whelps, unfiled pistolets,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That⁠—more than cannon shot⁠—avails or lets;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which, negligently left unrounded, look</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like many-angled figures in the book</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of some great conjurer that would enforce</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nature, as these do justice, from her course;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which, as the soul quickens head, feet and heart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As streams, like veins, run through th’ earth’s every part,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Visit all countries, and have slily made</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gorgeous France, ruin’d, ragged and decay’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Scotland, which knew no state, proud in one day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And mangled seventeen-headed Belgia.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or were it such gold as that wherewithal</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Almighty chemics, from each mineral</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Having by subtle fire a soul out-pull’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Are dirtily and desperately gull’d;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I would not spit to quench the fire they’re in,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For they are guilty of much heinous sin.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But shall my harmless angels perish?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall I lose my guard, my ease, my food, my all?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Much hope which they should nourish will be dead;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Much of my able youth, and lustihead</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Will vanish; if thou love, let them alone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For thou wilt love me less when they are gone;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And be content that some loud squeaking crier,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Well-pleas’d with one lean thread-bare groat for hire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>May like a devil roar through every street,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And gall the finder’s conscience, if he meet.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or let me creep to some dread conjurer,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That with fantastic scenes fills full much paper;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which hath divided heaven in tenements,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with whores, thieves, and murderers stuff’d his rents</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So full, that though he pass them all in sin,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He leaves himself no room to enter in.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But if, when all his art and time is spent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He say ’twill ne’er be found; yet be content;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Receive from him that doom ungrudgingly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Because he is the mouth of destiny.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou say’st, alas! the gold doth still remain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though it be changed, and put into a chain.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So in the first fallen angels resteth still</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wisdom and knowledge, but ’tis turn’d to ill;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As these should do good works, and should provide</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Necessities; but now must nurse thy pride.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And they are still bad angels; mine are none;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For form gives being, and their form is gone.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pity these angels yet; their dignities</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pass Virtues, Powers, and Principalities.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But thou art resolute; thy will be done;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet with such anguish, as her only son</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The mother in the hungry grave doth lay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unto the fire these martyrs I betray.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Good souls⁠—for you give life to everything⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Good angels⁠—for good messages you bring⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Destined you might have been to such an one,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As would have loved and worshipp’d you alone;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One that would suffer hunger, nakedness,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yea death, ere he would make your number less;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But, I am guilty of your sad decay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>May your few fellows longer with me stay.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But O! thou wretched finder whom I hate</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So, that I almost pity thy estate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gold being the heaviest metal amongst all,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>May my most heavy curse upon thee fall.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Here fetter’d, manacled, and hang’d in chains,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>First mayst thou be; then chain’d to hellish pains;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or be with foreign gold bribed to betray</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy country, and fail both of it and thy pay.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>May the next thing thou stoop’st to reach, contain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Poison, whose nimble fume rot thy moist brain;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or libels, or some interdicted thing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which negligently kept thy ruin bring.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lust-bred diseases rot thee; and dwell with thee</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Itching desire, and no ability.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>May all the evils that gold ever wrought;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All mischief that all devils ever thought;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Want after plenty, poor and gouty age,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The plagues of travellers, love, marriage</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Afflict thee, and at thy life’s last moment,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>May thy swollen sins themselves to thee present.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But, I forgive; repent thee, honest man!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gold is restorative; restore it then:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But if from it thou be’st loth to depart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Because ’tis cordial, would ’twere at thy heart.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="elegy-12" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<hgroup>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Elegy</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XII</span>
					</h3>
					<p epub:type="title">His Parting from Her</p>
				</hgroup>
				<p>
					<span>Since she must go, and I must mourn, come night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Environ me with darkness, whilst I write;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shadow that hell unto me, which alone</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I am to suffer when my love is gone.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Alas! the darkest magic cannot do it,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And that great hell, to boot, are shadows to it.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Should Cynthia quit thee, Venus, and each star,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It would not form one thought dark as mine are.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I could lend them obscureness now, and say</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Out of myself, there should be no more day.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such is already my self-want of sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Did not the fire within me force a light.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O Love, that fire and darkness should be mix’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or to thy triumphs such strange torments fix’d!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is it because thou thyself art blind, that we,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy martyrs, must no more each other see?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or takest thou pride to break us on thy wheel,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And view old Chaos in the pains we feel?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or have we left undone some mutual rite,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That thus with parting thou seek’st us to spite?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No, no. The fault is mine, impute it to me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or rather to conspiring destiny,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which, since I loved in jest before, decreed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That I should suffer, when I loved indeed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And therefore, sooner now than I can say,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I saw the golden fruit, ’tis rapt away;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or as I’d watch’d one drop in the vast stream,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I left wealthy only in a dream.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet, Love, thou’rt blinder than myself in this,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To vex my dove-like friend for my amiss;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And where one sad truth may expiate</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy wrath, to make her fortune run my fate.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So blinded justice doth, when favourites fall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Strike them, their house, their friends, their favourites all.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was’t not enough that thou didst dart thy fires</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into our bloods, inflaming our desires,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And madest us sigh, and blow, and pant, and burn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And then thyself into our flames didst turn?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was’t not enough that thou didst hazard us</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To paths in love so dark and dangerous,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And those so ambush’d round with household spies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And over all thy husband’s towering eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Inflamed with th’ ugly sweat of jealousy;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet went we not still on in constancy?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Have we for this kept guards, like spy on spy?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had correspondence whilst the foe stood by?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stolen, more to sweeten them, our many blisses</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of meetings, conference, embracements, kisses?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shadow’d with negligence our best respects?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Varied our language through all dialects</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of becks, winks, looks, and often under boards</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Spoke dialogues with our feet far from our words?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Have we proved all the secrets of our art,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yea, thy pale inwards, and thy panting heart?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, after all this passed purgatory,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Must sad divorce make us the vulgar story?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>First let our eyes be riveted quite through</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our turning brain, and both our lips grow to;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let our arms clasp like ivy, and our fear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Freeze us together, that we may stick here,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till Fortune, that would ruin us with the deed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Strain his eyes open, and yet make them bleed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For Love it cannot be, whom hitherto</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I have accused, should such a mischief do.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O Fortune, thou’rt not worth my least exclaim,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And plague enough thou hast in thy own name.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Do thy great worst; my friend and I have charms,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though not against thy strokes, against thy harms.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rend us in sunder; thou canst not divide</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our bodies so, but that our souls are tied,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And we can love by letters still and gifts,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thoughts and dreams; love never wanteth shifts.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I will not look upon the quickening sun,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But straight her beauty to my sense shall run;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The air shall note her soft, the fire, most pure;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Waters suggest her clear, and the earth sure.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Time shall not lose our passages; the spring,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How fresh our love was in the beginning;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The summer, how it ripen’d in the year;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And autumn, what our golden harvests were;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The winter I’ll not think on to spite thee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But count it a lost season; so shall she.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And dearest friend, since we must part, drown night</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With hope of day⁠—burdens well borne are light⁠—;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The cold and darkness longer hang somewhere,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet Phoebus equally lights all the sphere;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And what we cannot in like portion pay</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The world enjoys in mass, and so we may.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Be then ever yourself, and let no woe</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Win on your health, your youth, your beauty; so</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Declare yourself base Fortune’s enemy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No less be your contempt than her inconstancy;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That I may grow enamour’d on your mind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When mine own thoughts I here neglected find.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And this to the comfort of my dear I vow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My deeds shall still be what my deeds are now;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The poles shall move to teach me ere I start;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And when I change my love, I’ll change my heart.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nay, if I wax but cold in my desire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Think, heaven hath motion lost, and the world, fire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Much more I could, but many words have made</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That oft suspected which men most persuade.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Take therefore all in this; I love so true,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As I will never look for less in you.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="elegy-13" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<hgroup>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Elegy</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIII</span>
					</h3>
					<p epub:type="title">Julia</p>
				</hgroup>
				<p>
					<span>Hark, news, O envy; thou shalt hear descried</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My Julia; who as yet was ne’er envied.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To vomit gall in slander, swell her veins</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With calumny, that hell itself disdains,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is her continual practice; does her best,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To tear opinion e’en out of the breast</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of dearest friends, and⁠—which is worse than vile⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sticks jealousy in wedlock; her own child</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Scapes not the showers of envy. To repeat</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The monstrous fashions how, were alive to eat</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dear reputation; would to God she were</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But half so loth to act vice, as to hear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My mild reproof. Lived Mantuan now again</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That female Mastix to limn with his pen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This she Chimera that hath eyes of fire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Burning with anger⁠—anger feeds desire⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tongued like the night crow, whose ill boding cries</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Give out for nothing but new injuries;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her breath like to the juice in Tænarus,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That blasts the springs, though ne’er so prosperous;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her hands, I know not how, used more to spill</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The food of others than herself to fill;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But O! her mind, that Orcus, which includes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Legions of mischief, countless multitudes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of formless curses, projects unmade up,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Abuses yet unfashion’d, thoughts corrupt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Misshapen cavils, palpable untroths,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Inevitable errors, self-accusing loaths.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These, like those atoms swarming in the sun,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Throng in her bosom for creation.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I blush to give her half her due; yet say,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No poison’s half so bad as Julia.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="elegy-14" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<hgroup>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Elegy</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIV</span>
					</h3>
					<p epub:type="title">A Tale of a Citizen and His Wife</p>
				</hgroup>
				<p>
					<span>I sing no harm, good sooth, to any wight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To lord or fool, cuckold, beggar, or knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To peace-teaching lawyer, proctor, or brave</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Reformed or reducèd captain, knave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Officer, juggler, or justice of peace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Juror or judge; I touch no fat sow’s grease;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I am no libeller, nor will be any,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But⁠—like a true man⁠—say there are too many.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I fear not <i xml:lang="la">ore tenus</i>; for my tale</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor count nor counsellor will look red or pale.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>A citizen and his wife the other day</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Both riding on one horse, upon the way</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I overtook; the wench, a pretty peat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And⁠—by her eye⁠—well fitting for the feat.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I saw the lecherous citizen turn back</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His head, and on his wife’s lip steal a smack;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whence apprehending that the man was kind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Riding before to kiss his wife behind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To get acquaintance with him I began</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To sort discourse fit for so fine a man;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I ask’d the number of the plaguing bill;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ask’d if the custom farmers held out still;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of the Virginian plot, and whether Ward</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The traffic of the island seas had marr’d;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whether the Britain Burse did fill apace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And likely were to give th’ Exchange disgrace.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of new-built Aldgate, and the Moor-field crosses,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of store of bankrupts, and poor merchants’ losses</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I urgèd him to speak; but he⁠—as mute</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As an old courtier worn to his last suit⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Replies with only yeas and nays; at last</span>
					<br/>
					<span>—To fit his element⁠—my theme I cast</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On tradesmen’s gains; that set his tongue a-going.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Alas! good sir,” quoth he, “there is no doing</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In court or city now”; she smiled, and I,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, in my conscience, both gave him the lie</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In one met thought; but he went on apace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And at the present time with such a face</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He rail’d, as fray’d me; for he gave no praise</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To any but my Lord of Essex’ days;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Call’d that the age of action⁠—“True!” quoth I⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“There’s now as great an itch of bravery,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And heat of taking up, but cold lay down,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For, put to push of pay, away they run;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our only city trades of hope now are</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bawds, tavern-keepers, whores, and scriveners.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The much of privileged kinsmen and store</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of fresh protections make the rest all poor.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In the first state of their creation</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though many stoutly stand, yet proves not one</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A righteous pay-master.” Thus ran he on</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In a continued rage; so void of reason</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Seem’d his harsh talk, I sweat for fear of treason.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And⁠—troth⁠—how could I less? when in the prayer</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For the protection of the wise Lord Mayor,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And his wise brethren’s worships, when one prayeth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He swore that none could say amen with faith.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To get off him from what I glow’d to hear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In happy time an angel did appear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The bright sign of a loved and well-tried inn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where many citizens with their wives had been</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Well used and often; here I pray’d him stay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To take some due refreshment by the way.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Look, how he look’d that hid the gold, his hope,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And at return found nothing but a rope,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So he at me; refused and made away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though willing she pleaded a weary stay.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I found my miss, struck hands, and pray’d him tell⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To hold acquaintance still⁠—where he did dwell.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He barely named the street, promised the wine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But his kind wife gave me the very sign.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="elegy-15" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<hgroup>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Elegy</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XV</span>
					</h3>
					<p epub:type="title">The Expostulation</p>
				</hgroup>
				<p>
					<span>To make the doubt clear, that no woman’s true,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was it my fate to prove it strong in you?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thought I, but one had breathèd purest air;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And must she needs be false, because she’s fair?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is it your beauty’s mark, or of your youth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or your perfection, not to study truth?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or think you heaven is deaf, or hath no eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or those it hath smile at your perjuries?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Are vows so cheap with women, or the matter</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whereof they’re made, that they are writ in water,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And blown away with wind? Or doth their breath,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Both hot and cold, at once make life and death?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who could have thought so many accents sweet</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Form’d into words, so many sighs should meet</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As from our hearts, so many oaths, and tears</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sprinkled among, all sweeten’d by our fears,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the divine impression of stolen kisses,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That seal’d the rest, should now prove empty blisses?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Did you draw bonds to forfeit? sign to break?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or must we read you quite from what you speak,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And find the truth out the wrong way? or must</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He first desire you false, would wish you just?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O! I profane! though most of women be</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This kind of beast, my thoughts shall except thee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My dearest love; though froward jealousy</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With circumstance might urge thy inconstancy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sooner I’ll think the sun will cease to cheer</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The teeming earth, and that forget to bear;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sooner that rivers will run back, or Thames</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With ribs of ice in June will bind his streams;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or nature, by whose strength the world endures,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Would change her course, before you alter yours.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But O! that treacherous breast, to whom weak you</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Did drift our counsels, and we both may rue,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Having his falsehood found too late; ’twas he</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That made me cast you guilty, and you me;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whilst he, black wretch, betray’d each simple word</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We spake, unto the cunning of a third.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cursed may he be, that so our love hath slain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And wander on the earth, wretched as Cain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wretched as he, and not deserve least pity.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In plaguing him, let misery be witty;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let all eyes shun him, and he shun each eye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till he be noisome as his infamy;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>May he without remorse deny God thrice,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And not be trusted more on his soul’s price;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, after all self-torment, when he dies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>May wolves tear out his heart, vultures his eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Swine eat his bowels, and his falser tongue</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That utter’d all, be to some raven flung;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And let his carrion corse be a longer feast</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To the king’s dogs, than any other beast.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now have I cursed, let us our love revive;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In me the flame was never more alive.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I could begin again to court and praise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in that pleasure lengthen the short days</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of my life’s lease; like painters that do take</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Delight, not in made work, but whiles they make.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I could renew those times, when first I saw</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Love in your eyes, that gave my tongue the law</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To like what you liked; and at masks and plays</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Commend the self-same actors, the same wavs;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ask how you did, and often with intent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of being officious, be impertinent;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All which were such soft pastimes, as in these</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Love was as subtly catch’d as a disease.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But being got, it is a treasure sweet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which to defend is harder than to get;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And ought not be profaned, on either part,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For though ’tis got by chance, ’tis kept by art.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="elegy-16" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<hgroup>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Elegy</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XVI</span>
					</h3>
					<p epub:type="title">On His Mistress</p>
				</hgroup>
				<p>
					<span>By our first strange and fatal interview,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By all desires which thereof did ensue,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By our long starving hopes, by that remorse</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which my words’ masculine persuasive force</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Begot in thee, and by the memory</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of hurts, which spies and rivals threaten’d me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I calmly beg. But by thy father’s wrath,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By all pains, which want and divorcement hath,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I conjure thee, and all the oaths which I</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thou have sworn to seal joint constancy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Here I unswear, and overswear them thus;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou shalt not love by ways so dangerous.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Temper, O fair love, love’s impetuous rage;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Be my true mistress still, not my feign’d page.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I’ll go, and, by thy kind leave, leave behind</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thee, only worthy to nurse in my mind</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thirst to come back; O! if thou die before,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My soul from other lands to thee shall soar.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy else almighty beauty cannot move</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rage from the seas, nor thy love teach them love,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor tame wild Boreas’ harshness; thou hast read</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How roughly he in pieces shivered</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fair Orithea, whom he swore he loved.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fall ill or good, ’tis madness to have proved</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dangers unurged; feed on this flattery,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That absent lovers one in th’ other be.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dissemble nothing, not a boy, nor change</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy body’s habit, nor mind; be not strange</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To thyself only. All will spy in thy face</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A blushing womanly discovering grace.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Richly clothed apes are call’d apes, and as soon</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Eclipsed as bright, we call the moon the moon.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Men of France, changeable chameleons,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Spitals of diseases, shops of fashions,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Love’s fuellers, and the rightest company</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of players, which upon the world’s stage be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Will quickly know thee, and no less, alas!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Th’ indifferent Italian, as we pass</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His warm land, well content to think thee page,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Will hunt thee with such lust, and hideous rage,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As Lot’s fair guests were vex’d. But none of these,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor spongy hydroptic Dutch shall thee displease,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If thou stay here. O stay here, for for thee</span>
					<br/>
					<span>England is only a worthy gallery,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To walk in expectation, till from thence</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our greatest king call thee to his presence.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When I am gone, dream me some happiness;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor let thy looks our long-hid love confess;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor praise, nor dispraise me, nor bless nor curse</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Openly love’s force, nor in bed fright thy nurse</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With midnight’s startings, crying out, O! O!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nurse, O! my love is slain; I saw him go</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O’er the white Alps alone; I saw him, I,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Assail’d, fight, taken, stabb’d, bleed, fall, and die</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Augur me better chance, except dread Jove</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Think it enough for me to have had thy love.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="elegy-17" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<hgroup>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Elegy</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XVII</span>
					</h3>
					<p epub:type="title">Variety</p>
				</hgroup>
				<p>
					<span>The heavens rejoice in motion; why should I</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Abjure my so much loved variety,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And not with many youth and love divide?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pleasure is none, if not diversified.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The sun that, sitting in the chair of light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sheds flame into what else so ever doth seem bright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is not contented at one sign to inn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But ends his year, and with a new begin.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All things do willingly in change delight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The fruitful mother of our appetite;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rivers the clearer and more pleasing are,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where their fair-spreading streams run wide and clear;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And a dead lake, that no strange bark doth greet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Corrupts itself, and what doth live in it.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let no man tell me such a one is fair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And worthy all alone my love to share.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nature in her hath done the liberal part</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of a kind mistress, and employed her art,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To make her lovable, and I aver</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Him not humane, that would turn back from her.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I love her well, and would, if need were, die,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To do her service. But follows it that I</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Must serve her only, when I may have choice?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The law is hard, and shall not have my voice.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The last I saw in all extremes is fair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And holds me in the sunbeams of her hair;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her nymph-like features such agreements have,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That I could venture with her to the grave.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Another’s brown; I like her not the worse;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her tongue is soft and takes me with discourse.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Others, for that they well descended were,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Do in my love obtain as large a share;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And though they be not fair, ’tis much with me</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To win their love only for their degree.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And though I fail of my required ends,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The attempt is glorious and itself commends.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How happy were our sires in ancient time,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who held plurality of loves no crime.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With them it was accounted charity</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To stir up race of all indifferently;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Kindred were not exempted from the bands,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which with the Persian still in usage stands.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Women were then no sooner ask’d than won,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And what they did was honest and well done.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But since this little Honour hath been used,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our weak credulity hath been abused;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The golden laws of nature are repeal’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which our first fathers in such reverence held;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our liberty reversed and charters gone;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And we made servants to Opinion;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A monster in no certain shape attired,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And whose original is much desired,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Formless at first, but growing on its fashions,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And doth prescribe manners and laws to nations.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Here love received immedicable harms,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And was despoiled of his daring arms;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A greater want than is his daring eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He lost those awful wings with which he flies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His sinewy bow and those immortal darts,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With which he is wont to bruise resisting hearts.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Only some few, strong in themselves and free,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Retain the seeds of ancient liberty,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Following that part of love although depress’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet make a throne for him within their breast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In spite of modern censures him avowing</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their sovereign, all service him allowing</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Amongst which troop although I am the least,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet equal in perfection with the best,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I glory in subjection of his hand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor ever did decline his least command;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For in whatever form the message came</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My heart did open and receive the same,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But time will in his course a point descry</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When I this lovèd service must deny;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For our allegiance temporary is;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With firmer age returns our liberties.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What time in years and judgment we reposed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall not so easily be to change disposed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor to the art of several eyes obeying,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But beauty with true worth securely weighing;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which being found assembled in some one</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We’ll leave her ever, and love her alone.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="elegy-18" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<hgroup>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Elegy</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XVIII</span>
					</h3>
					<p epub:type="title">Love’s Progress</p>
				</hgroup>
				<p>
					<span>Whoever loves, if he do not propose</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The right true end of love, he’s one that goes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To sea for nothing but to make him sick.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Love is a bear-whelp born; if we o’er-lick</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our love, and force it new strange shapes to take,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We err, and of a lump a monster make.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Were not a calf a monster, that were grown</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Faced like a man, though better than his own?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Perfection is in unity; prefer</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One woman first, and then one thing in her.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I, when I value gold, may think upon</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The ductileness, the application,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The wholesomeness, the ingenuity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From rust, from soil, from fire ever free;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But if I love it, ’tis because ’tis made</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By our new nature, use, the soul of trade.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All this in women we might think upon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>—If women had them⁠—and yet love but one.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Can men more injure women than to say</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They love them for that, by which they’re not they?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Makes virtue woman? must I cool my blood</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till I both be, and find one wise and good?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>May barren angels love so. But if we</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Make love to woman, virtue is not she,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As beauty is not, nor wealth. He that strays thus</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From her to hers is more adulterous</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than if he took her maid. Search every sphere</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And firmament, our Cupid is not there.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He’s an infernal God, and underground</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With Pluto dwells, where gold and fire abound.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Men to such gods their sacrificing coals</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Did not on altars lay, but pits and holes.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Although we see celestial bodies move</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Above the earth, the earth we till and love.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So we her airs contemplate, words and heart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And virtues, but we love the centric part.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor is the soul more worthy, or more fit</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For love, than this, as infinite as it.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But in attaining this desired place</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How much they err, that set out at the face?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The hair a forest is of ambushes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of springes, snares, fetters, and manacles;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The brow becalms us when ’tis smooth and plain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And when ’tis wrinkled, shipwrecks us again;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Smooth, ’tis a paradise, where we would have</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Immortal stay, but wrinkled ’tis a grave.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The nose, like to the first meridian, runs</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not ’twixt an east and west, but ’twixt two suns;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It leaves a cheek, a rosy hemisphere,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On either side, and then directs us where</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon the islands fortunate we fall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not faint Canaries, but ambrosial,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her swelling lips, to which when we are come,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We anchor there, and think ourselves at home,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For they seem all; there Siren’s songs and there</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wise Delphic oracles do fill the ear.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There, in a creek where chosen pearls do swell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The remora, her cleaving tongue, doth dwell.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These and the glorious promontory, her chin,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O’erpast, and the straight Hellespont between</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Sestos and Abydos of her breasts,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not of two lovers, but two loves, the nests,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Succeeds a boundless sea, but yet thine eye</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some island moles may scattered there descry;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And sailing towards her India, in that way</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall at her fair Atlantic navel stay.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though there the current be the pilot made,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet, ere thou be where thou shouldst be embay’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou shalt upon another forest set,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where many shipwreck, and no further get.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When thou art there, consider what this chase</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Misspent by thy beginning at the face.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rather set out below; practise thy art;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some symmetry the foot hath with that part</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which thou dost seek, and is thy map for that,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lovely enough to stop, but not stay at.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Least subject to disguise and change it is;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Men say the devil never can change his;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It is the emblem that hath figured</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Firmness; ’tis the first part that comes to bed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Civility we see refined; the kiss,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which at the face began, transplanted is,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Since to the hand, since to the imperial knee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now at the papal foot delights to be.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If kings think that the nearer way, and do</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rise from the foot, lovers may do so too;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For, as free spheres move faster far than can</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Birds, whom the air resists, so may that man</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which goes this empty and ethereal way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than if at beauty’s elements he stay.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rich Nature in women wisely made</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Two purses, and their mouths aversely laid.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They then, which to the lower tribute owe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That way which that exchequer looks must go;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He which doth not, his error is as great,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As who by clyster gives the stomach meat.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="elegy-19" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<hgroup>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Elegy</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIX</span>
					</h3>
					<p epub:type="title">To His Mistress Going to Bed</p>
				</hgroup>
				<p>
					<span>Come, madam, come, all rest my powers defy;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Until I labour, I in labour lie.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The foe ofttimes, having the foe in sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is tired with standing, though he never fight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Off with that girdle, like heaven’s zone glittering,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But a far fairer world encompassing.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unpin that spangled breast-plate, which you wear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That th’ eyes of busy fools may be stopp’d there.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unlace yourself, for that harmonious chime</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tells me from you that now it is bed-time.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Off with that happy busk, which I envy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That still can be, and still can stand so nigh.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Your gown going off such beauteous state reveals,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As when from flowery meads th’ hill’s shadow steals.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Off with your wiry coronet, and show</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The hairy diadems which on you do grow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Off with your hose and shoes; then softly tread</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In this love’s hallow’d temple, this soft bed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In such white robes heaven’s angels used to be</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Revealed to men; thou, angel, bring’st with thee</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A heaven-like Mahomet’s paradise; and though</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ill spirits walk in white, we easily know</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By this these angels from an evil sprite;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Those set our hairs, but these our flesh upright.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Licence my roving hands, and let them go</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Before, behind, between, above, below.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Oh, my America, my Newfoundland,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My kingdom, safest when with one man mann’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My mine of precious stones, my empery;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How am I blest in thus discovering thee!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To enter in these bonds, is to be free;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then, where my hand is set, my soul shall be.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Full nakedness! All joys are due to thee;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As souls unbodied, bodies unclothed must be</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To taste whole joys. Gems which you women use</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Are like Atlanta’s ball cast in men’s views;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That, when a fool’s eye lighteth on a gem,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His earthly soul might court that, not them.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like pictures, or like books’ gay coverings made</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For laymen, are all women thus array’d.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Themselves are only mystic books, which we</span>
					<br/>
					<span>—Whom their imputed grace will dignify⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Must see reveal’d. Then, since that I may know,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As liberally as to thy midwife show</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thyself; cast all, yea, this white linen hence;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There is no penance due to innocence:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To teach thee, I am naked first; why then,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What needst thou have more covering than a man?</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="elegy-20" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<hgroup>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Elegy</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XX</span>
					</h3>
					<p epub:type="title">Love’s War</p>
				</hgroup>
				<p>
					<span>Till I have peace with thee, war other men,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And when I have peace, can I leave thee then?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All other wars are scrupulous; only thou</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O free fair city, mayst thyself allow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To any one. In Flanders, who can tell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whether the master press, or men rebel?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Only we know, that which most idiots say,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They must bear blows which come to part the fray.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>France in her lunatic giddiness did hate</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ever our men, yea, and our God, of late;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet she relies upon our angels well,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which ne’er return, no more than they which fell.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sick Ireland is with a strange war possest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like to an ague, now raging, now at rest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which time will cure; yet it must do her good</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If she were purg’d, and her head-vein let blood;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Midas joys our Spanish journeys give;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We touch all gold, but find no food to live;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I should be in that hot parching clime</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To dust and ashes turned before my time.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To mew me in a ship is to enthral</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Me in a prison that were like to fall;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or in a cloister, save that there men dwell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In a calm heaven, here in a swaying hell.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Long voyages are long consumptions,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And ships are carts for executions;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yea, they are deaths; is ’t not all one to fly</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into another world, as ’tis to die?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Here let me war; in these arms let me lie:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Here let me parley, batter, bleed, and die.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thine arms imprison me, and my arms thee;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy heart thy ransom is; take mine for me.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Other men war, that they their rest may gain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But we will rest that we may fight again.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Those wars th’ ignorant, these th’ experienced love;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There we are always under, here above.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There engines far off breed a just true fear;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Near thrusts, pikes, stabs, yea, bullets, hurt not here.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There lies are wrongs; here safe uprightly lie.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There men kill men; we’ll make one by and by.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou nothing, I not half so much shall do</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In those wars, as they may which from us two</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall spring. Thousands we see which travel not</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To war, but stay, swords, arms, and shot</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To make at home; and shall not I do then</span>
					<br/>
					<span>More glorious service, staying to make men?</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<article id="heroical-epistle" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<hgroup>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Heroical Epistle</h3>
					<p epub:type="subtitle">Sappho to Philaenis</p>
				</hgroup>
				<p>
					<span>Where is that holy fire, which verse is said</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To have? Is that enchanting force decay’d?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Verse that draws nature’s works from nature’s law,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thee, her best work, to her work cannot draw.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Have my tears quench’d my old poetic fire?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Why quench’d they not as well that of desire?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thoughts, my mind’s creatures, often are with thee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But I, their maker, want their liberty.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Only thine image in my heart doth sit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But that is wax, and fires environ it.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My fires have driven, thine have drawn it hence;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I am robb’d of picture, heart, and sense.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dwells with me still mine irksome memory,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which, both to keep and lose, grieves equally.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That tells me how fair thou art; thou art so fair</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As gods, when gods to thee I do compare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Are graced thereby; and to make blind men see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What things gods are, I say they’re like to thee.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For if we justly call each silly man</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A little world, what shall we call thee then?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou art not soft, and clear, and straight, and fair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As down, as stars, cedars, and lilies are;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But thy right hand, and cheek, and eye, only</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Are like thy other hand, and cheek, and eye.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such was my Phao awhile, but shall be never,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As thou wast, art, and O, mayst thou be ever.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Here lovers swear in their idolatry,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That I am such; but grief discolours me.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And yet I grieve the less, lest grief remove</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My beauty, and make me unworthy of thy love.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Plays some soft boy with thee, O, there wants yet</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A mutual feeling which should sweeten it.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His chin, a thorny, hairy unevenness</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Doth threaten, and some daily change possess.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy body is a natural paradise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In whose self, unmanured, all pleasure lies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor needs perfection; why shouldst thou then</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Admit the tillage of a harsh rough man?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Men leave behind them that which their sin shows,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And are as thieves traced, which rob when it snows.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But of our dalliance no more signs there are,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than fishes leave in streams, or birds in air;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And between us all sweetness may be had,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All, all that nature yields, or art can add.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My two lips, eyes, thighs, differ from thy two</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But so, as thine from one another do,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, O, no more; the likeness being such,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Why should they not alike in all parts touch?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hand to strange hand, lip to lip none denies;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Why should they breast to breast, or thighs to thighs?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Likeness begets such strange self-flattery,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That touching myself all seems done to thee.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Myself I embrace, and mine own hands I kiss,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And amorously thank myself for this.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Me, in my glass, I call thee; but alas,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When I would kiss, tears dim mine eyes and glass.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O cure this loving madness, and restore</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Me to thee, thee my half, my all, my more.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So may thy cheeks’ red outwear scarlet dye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And their white, whiteness of the Galaxy;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So may thy mighty, amazing beauty move</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Envy in all women, and in all men love;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And so be change and sickness far from thee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As thou by coming near keep’st them from me.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
		</article>
	</body>
</html>
