<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Epicedes and Obsequies Upon the Death of Sundry Personages</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<article id="epicedes-and-obsequies" epub:type="part">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Epicedes and Obsequies Upon the Death of Sundry Personages</h2>
			<article id="elegy-upon-the-untimely-death-of-the-incomparable-prince-henry" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Elegy Upon the Untimely Death of the Incomparable Prince Henry</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Look to me, faith, and look to my faith, God;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For both my centres feel this period.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of weight one centre, one of greatness is;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And reason is that centre, faith is this;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For into our reason flow, and there do end,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All that this natural world doth comprehend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Quotidian things, and equidistant hence,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shut in, for man, in one circumference.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But for th’ enormous greatnesses, which are</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So disproportion’d and so angular,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As is God’s essence, place, and providence,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where, how, when, what souls do, departed hence,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These things (eccentric else) on faith do strike;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet neither all, nor upon all, alike.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For reason, put to her best extension,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Almost meets faith, and makes both centres one</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And nothing ever came so near to this,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As contemplation of that prince we miss.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For all that faith might credit mankind could,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Reason still seconded that this prince would.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If, then, least moving of the centre make,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>More than if whole hell belch’d, the world to shake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What must this do, centres distracted so,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That we see not what to believe or know?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was it not well believed till now, that he,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose reputation was an ecstasy</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On neighbour states, which knew not why to wake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till he discover’d what ways he would take;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For whom, what princes angled, when they tried,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Met a torpedo, and were stupefied;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And others’ studies, how he would be bent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was his great father’s greatest instrument,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And activest spirit, to convey and tie</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This soul of peace through Christianity?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was it not well believed, that he would make</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This general peace th’ eternal overtake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And that his times might have stretch’d out so far,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As to touch those of which they emblems are?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For to confirm this just belief, that now</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The last days came, we saw heaven did allow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That, but from his aspect and exercise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In peaceful times rumours of wars did rise.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But now this faith is heresy; we must</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Still stay, and vex our great-grandmother, Dust.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O, is God prodigal? hath He spent His store</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of plagues on us; and only now, when more</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Would ease us much, doth He grudge misery,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And will not let’s enjoy our curse⁠—to die?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As for the earth thrown lowest down of all,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Twere an ambition to desire to fall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So God, in our desire to die, doth know</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our plot for ease, in being wretched so.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Therefore we live; though such a life we have,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As but so many mandrakes on his grave.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What had his growth and generation done,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When, what we are, his putrefaction</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sustains in us, earth, which griefs animate?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor hath our world now other soul than that;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And could grief get so high as heaven, that choir,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Forgetting this their new joy, would desire</span>
					<br/>
					<span>—With grief to see him⁠—he had stay’d below,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To rectify our errors they foreknow.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is the other centre, reason, faster then?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where should we look for that, now we’re not men?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For if our reason be our connection</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of causes, now to us there can be none.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For, as if all the substances were spent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Twere madness to enquire of accident,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So is ’t to look for reason, he being gone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The only subject reason wrought upon.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If fate have such a chain, whose divers links</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Industrious man discerneth, as he thinks,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When miracle doth come, and so steal in</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A new link, man knows not where to begin.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At a much deader fault must reason be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Death having broke off such a link as he.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But now, for us, with busy proof to come,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That we’ve no reason, would prove we had some.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So would just lamentations; therefore we</span>
					<br/>
					<span>May safelier say, that we are dead, than he;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So, if our griefs we do not well declare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We’ve double excuse; he is not dead, and we are.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet I would not die yet; for though I be</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Too narrow to think him, as he is he</span>
					<br/>
					<span>—Our souls best baiting and mid-period,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In her long journey, of considering God⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet, no dishonour, I can reach him thus,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As he embraced the fires of love, with us.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O may I, since I live, but see or hear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That she⁠—intelligence which moved this sphere,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I pardon fate, my life; whoe’er thou be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which hast the noble conscience, thou art she.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I conjure thee by all the charms he spoke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By th’ oaths, which only you two never broke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By all the souls ye sigh’d, that if you see</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These lines, you wish I knew your history;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So, much as you two mutual heavens were here,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I were an angel, singing what you were.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="obsequies-of-the-lord-harrington-brother-to-the-countess-of-bedford" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Obsequies of the Lord Harrington, Brother to the Countess of Bedford</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Fair soul, which wast, not only as all souls be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then when thou wast infusèd, harmony,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But didst continue so; and now dost bear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A part in God’s great organ, this whole sphere;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If looking up to God, or down to us,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou find that any way is pervious</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Twixt heaven and earth, and that men’s actions do</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Come to your knowledge, and affections too,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>See, and with joy, me to that good degree</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of goodness grown, that I can study thee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And by these meditations refined,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Can unapparel and enlarge my mind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And so can make, by this soft ecstasy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This place a map of heaven, myself of thee.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou seest me here at midnight; now all rest;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Times dead⁠—low water, when all minds divest</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To-morrow’s business; when the labourers have</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such rest in bed, that their last churchyard grave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Subject to change, will scarce be a type of this;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now, when the client, whose last hearing is</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To-morrow, sleeps; when the condemned man,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who, when he opes his eyes, must shut them then</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Again by death, although sad watch he keep,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Doth practice dying by a little sleep;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou at this midnight seest me, and as soon</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As that sun rises to me, midnight’s noon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All the world grows transparent, and I see</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through all, both church and state, in seeing thee;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I discern by favour of this light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Myself, the hardest object of the sight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>God is the glass; as thou, when thou dost see</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Him Who sees all, seest all concerning thee;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So, yet unglorified, I comprehend</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All, in these mirrors of thy ways and end.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though God be our true glass, through which we see</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All, since the being of all things is He,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet are the trunks which do to us derive</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Things, in proportion, fit by perspective,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Deeds of good men; for by their being here,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Virtues, indeed remote, seem to be near.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But where can I affirm, or where arrest</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My thoughts on his deeds? which shall I call best?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For fluid virtue cannot be looked on,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor can endure a contemplation.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As bodies change, and as I do not wear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Those spirits, humours, blood I did last year,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, as if on a stream I fix mine eye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That drop, which I looked on, is presently</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Push’d with more waters from my sight, and gone;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So in this sea of virtues, can no one</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Be insisted on; virtues as rivers pass,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet still remains that virtuous man there was.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And as if man feed on man’s flesh, and so</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Part of his body to another owe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet at the last two perfect bodies rise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Because God knows where every atom lies;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So, if one knowledge were made of all those,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who knew his minutes well, he might dispose</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His virtues into names and ranks; but I</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Should injure nature, virtue, and destiny,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Should I divide and discontinue so</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Virtue, which did in one entireness grow.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For as he that should say spirits are framed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of all the purest parts that can be named,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Honours not spirits half so much as he</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which says they have no parts, but simple be;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So is ’t of virtue, for a point and one</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Are much entirer than a million.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And had fate meant to have had his virtues told,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It would have let him live to have been old;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So then that virtue in season, and then this,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We might have seen, and said, that now he is</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Witty, now wise, now temperate, now just.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In good short lives, virtues are fain to thrust,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to be sure betimes to get a place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When they would exercise, lack time and space.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So was it in this person, forced to be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For lack of time, his own epitome;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So to exhibit in few years as much</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As all the long-breathed chronicles can touch.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As when an angel down from heaven doth fly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our quick thought cannot keep him company;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We cannot think, “Now he is at the sun,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now through the moon, now he through th’ air doth run”;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet when he’s come, we know he did repair</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To all ’twixt heaven and earth, sun, moon, and air.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And as this angel in an instant knows,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And yet we know, this sudden knowledge grows</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By quick amassing several forms of things,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which he successively to order brings,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When they, whose slow-paced lame thoughts cannot go</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So fast as he, think that he doth not so.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Just as a perfect reader doth not dwell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On every syllable, nor stay to spell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet without doubt he doth distinctly see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And lay together every A and B;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So, in short-lived good men, is not understood</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Each several virtue, but the compound good;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For they all virtue’s paths in that pace tread,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As angels go, and know, and as men read.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O, why should then these men, these lumps of balm,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sent hither the world’s tempest to becalm,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Before by deeds they are diffused and spread,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And so make us alive, themselves be dead?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O soul, O circle, why so quickly be</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy ends, thy birth and death closed up in thee?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Since one foot of thy compass still was placed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In heaven, the other might securely have paced,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In the most large extent, through every path</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which the whole world or man th’ abridgment hath.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou know’st that though the tropic circles have</span>
					<br/>
					<span>—Yea, and those small ones which the Poles engrave⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All the same roundness, evenness, and all</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The endlessness of th’ equinoctial;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet, when we come to measure distances,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How here, how there, the sun affected is,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When he doth faintly work, and when prevail,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Only great circles, then, can be our scale.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So though thy circle to thyself express</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All, tending to thy endless happiness,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And we by our good use of it may try,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Both how to live well, young, and how to die;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet since we must be old, and age endures</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His torrid zone at court, and calentures</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of hot ambitions, irreligion’s ice,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Zeal’s agues, and hydroptic avarice</span>
					<br/>
					<span>—Infirmities, which need the scale of truth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As well as lust and ignorance of youth⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Why didst thou not for these give medicines too,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And by thy doing set us what to do?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though as small pocket-clocks, whose every wheel</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Doth each mismotion and distemper feel,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose hands get shaking palsies, and whose string</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(His sinews) slackens, and whose soul, the spring,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Expires, or languishes; whose pulse, the fly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Either beats not, or beats unevenly;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose voice, the bell, doth rattle or grow dumb,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or idle as men which to their last hours are come,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If these clocks be not wound, or be wound still,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or be not set, or set at every will;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So youth is easiest to destruction,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If then we follow all, or follow none.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet, as in great clocks which in steeples chime,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Placed to inform whole towns to employ their time,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>An error doth more harm, being general,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When small clocks’ faults only on the wearer fall;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So work the faults of age, on which the eye</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of children, servants, or the state rely.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Why wouldst not thou, then, which hadst such a soul,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A clock so true, as might the sun control,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And daily hadst from Him, who gave it thee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Instructions, such as it could never be</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Disorder’d, stay here, as a general</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And great sun-dial, to have set us all?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O, why wouldest thou be an instrument</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To this unnatural course, or why consent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To this, not miracle, but prodigy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That when the ebbs longer than flowings be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Virtue, whose flood did with thy youth begin,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Should so much faster ebb out, than flow in?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though her flood were blown in by thy first breath,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All is at once sunk in the whirlpool death.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which word I would not name, but that I see</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Death, else a desert, grown a court by thee.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now I am sure that if a man would have</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Good company, his entry is a grave.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Methinks all cities, now, but anthills be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where, when the several labourers I see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For children, house, provision taking pain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They’re all but ants, carrying eggs, straw, and grain.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And churchyards are our cities, unto which</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The most repair, that are in goodness rich.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There is the best concourse and confluence,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There are the holy suburbs, and from thence</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Begins God’s city, New Jerusalem,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which doth extend her utmost gates to them.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At that gate, then, triumphant soul, dost thou</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Begin thy triumph. But since laws allow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That at the triumph day the people may</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All that they will ’gainst the triumpher say,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let me here use that freedom, and express</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My grief, though not to make thy triumph less.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By law to triumphs none admitted be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till they as magistrates get victory.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though then to thy force all youth’s foes did yield,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet till fit time had wrought thee to that field,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To which thy rank in this state destined thee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That there thy counsels might get victory,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And so in that capacity remove</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All jealousies ’twixt prince and subjects’ love,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou couldst no title to this triumph have;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou didst intrude on death, usurp a grave.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then, though victoriously, thou hadst fought as yet</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But with thine own affections, with the heat</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of youth’s desires, and colds of ignorance,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But till thou shouldst successfully advance</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thine arms ’gainst foreign enemies, which are</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Both envy, and acclamation popular</span>
					<br/>
					<span>—For both these engines equally defeat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though by a divers mine, those which are great⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till then thy war was but a civil war,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For which to triumph none admitted are;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No more are they who, though with good success,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In a defensive war their power express.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Before men triumph, the dominion</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Must be enlarged, and not preserved alone.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Why shouldst thou, then, whose battles were to win</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thyself from those straits nature put thee in,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to deliver up to God that state,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of which He gave thee the vicariate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which is thy soul and body, as entire</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As he who takes indentures doth require;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But didst not stay to enlarge His kingdom too,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By making others, what thou didst, to do;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Why shouldst thou triumph now, when heaven no more</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hath got by getting thee, than it had before;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For heaven and thou, e’en when thou livedst here,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of one another in possession were.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But this from triumph most disables thee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That that place which is conquered must be</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Left safe from present war, and likely doubt</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of imminent commotions to break out;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And hath he left us so? or can it be</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His territory was no more than he?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No, we were all his charge; the diocese</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of every exemplar man the whole world is;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And he was joined in commission</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With tutelar angels, sent to every one.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But though this freedom to upbraid and chide</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Him who triumph’d were lawful, it was tied</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With this, that it might never reference have</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unto the senate, who this triumph gave;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Men might at Pompey jest, but they might not</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At that authority by which he got</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Leave to triumph, before by age he might;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So though, triumphant soul, I dare to write,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Moved with a reverential anger, thus,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That thou so early wouldst abandon us;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet I am far from daring to dispute</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With that great sovereignty, whose absolute</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Prerogative hath thus dispensed with thee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Gainst nature’s laws, which just impugners be</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of early triumphs; and I, though with pain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lessen our loss, to magnify thy gain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of triumph, when I say, it was more fit</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That all men should lack thee, than thou lack it.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though then in our time be not suffered</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That testimony of love unto the dead,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To die with them, and in their graves be hid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As Saxon wives, and French <i xml:lang="la">soldurii</i> did;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And though in no degree I can express</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Grief in great Alexander’s great excess,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who at his friend’s death made whole towns divest</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their walls and bulwarks, which became them best;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Do not, fair soul, this sacrifice refuse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That in thy grave I do inter my Muse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which, by my grief, great as thy worth, being cast</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Behindhand, yet hath spoke, and spoke her last.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="elegy-on-the-lady-markham" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Elegy on the Lady Markham</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Man is the world, and death the ocean,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To which God gives the lower parts of man,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This sea environs all, and though as yet</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">God hath set marks and bounds ’twixt us and it,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet doth it roar, and gnaw, and still pretend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And breaks our bank, whene’er it takes a friend.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then our land waters, tears of passion, vent;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Our waters, then, above our firmament</span>
					<br/>
					<span>—Tears which our soul doth for her sins let fall⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Take all a brackish taste, and funeral.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And e’en those tears which should wash sin, are sin.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">We, after God’s “No,” drown the world again.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nothing but man of all envenom’d things</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Doth work upon itself with inborn stings.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tears are false spectacles; we cannot see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through passion’s mist, what we are or what she.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In her this sea of death hath made no breach,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But as the tide doth wash the slimy beach,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And leaves embroider’d works upon the sand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So is her flesh refined by death’s cold hand.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As men of China, after an age’s stay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Do take up porcelain, where they buried clay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So at this grave, her limbec⁠—which refines</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The diamonds, rubies, sapphires, pearls and mines,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of which this flesh was⁠—her soul shall inspire</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Flesh of such stuff, as God, when His last fire</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Annuls this world, to recompense it, shall</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Make and name then th’ elixir of this all.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They say the sea, when it gains, loseth too;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If carnal death, the younger brother, do</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Usurp the body, our soul, which subject is</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To th’ elder death by sin, is freed by this.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They perish both, when they attempt the just;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For graves our trophies are, and both death’s dust.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So, unobnoxious now, she hath buried both;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For none to death sins, that to sin is loth;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor do they die, which are not loth to die;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So hath she this and that virginity.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Grace was in her extremely diligent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That kept her from sin, yet made her repent.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of what small spots pure white complains! Alas</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How little poison cracks a crystal glass!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She sinn’d but just enough to let us see</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That God’s word must be true, “All, sinners be.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So much did zeal her conscience rarify,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That extreme truth lacked little of a lie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Making omissions acts, laying the touch</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of sin on things that sometime may be such.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As Moses’ cherubins, whose natures do</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Surpass all speed, by him are winged too;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So would her soul, already in heaven, seem then</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To climb by tears the common stairs of men.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How fit she was for God, I am content</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To speak, that death his vain haste may repent.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How fit for us, how even and how sweet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How good in all her titles, and how meet</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To have reform’d this forward heresy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That women can no parts of friendship be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How moral, how divine, shall not be told,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lest they that hear her virtues, think her old;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And lest we take death’s part, and make him glad</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of such a prey, and to his triumph add.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="elegy-on-mistress-boulstred" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Elegy on Mistress Boulstred</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Death I recant, and say, “Unsaid by me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whate’er hath slipp’d, that might diminish thee.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Spiritual treason, atheism” ’tis to say</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That any can thy summons disobey.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Th’ earth’s face is but thy table; there are set</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Plants, cattle, men, dishes for death to eat.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In a rude hunger now he millions draws</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into his bloody, or plaguy, or starved jaws.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now he will seem to spare, and doth more waste,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Eating the best first, well preserved to last.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now wantonly he spoils, and eats us not,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But breaks off friends, and lets us piecemeal rot.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor will this earth serve him; he sinks the deep</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where harmless fish monastic silence keep;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who⁠—were Death dead⁠—by roes of living sand</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Might sponge that element, and make it land.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He rounds the air, and breaks the hymnic notes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In birds’, heaven’s choristers, organic throats;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which, if they did not die, might seem to be</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A tenth rank in the heavenly hierarchy.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O strong and long-lived death, how camest thou in?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And how without creation didst begin?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou hast, and shalt see dead, before thou diest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All the four Monarchies, and Antichrist.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How could I think thee nothing, that see now</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In all this All nothing else is, but thou?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our births and lives, vices and virtues, be</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wasteful consumptions, and degrees of thee.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For we, to live, our bellows wear and breath,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor are we mortal, dying, dead, but death.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And though thou be’st, O mighty bird of prey,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So much reclaim’d by God, that thou must lay</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All that thou kill’st at His feet, yet doth He</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Reserve but few, and leaves the most to thee.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And of those few now thou hast overthrown</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">One whom thy blow makes, not ours, nor thine own.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She was more storeys high; hopeless to come</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To her soul, thou hast offer’d at her lower room.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her soul and body was a king and court;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But thou hast both of captain miss’d and fort.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As houses fall not, though the kings remove,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Bodies of saints rest for their souls above.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Death gets ’twixt souls and bodies such a place</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As sin insinuates ’twixt just men and grace;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Both work a separation, no divorce.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her soul is gone to usher up her corse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which shall be almost another soul⁠—for there</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Bodies are purer than best souls are here.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Because in her, her virtues did outgo</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her years, would’st thou, O emulous death, do so,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And kill her young to thy loss? must the cost</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of beauty and wit, apt to do harm, be lost?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What though thou found’st her proof ’gainst sins of youth?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">O, every age a diverse sin pursueth.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou should’st have stayed, and taken better hold.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shortly, ambitious; covetous, when old,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She might have proved; and such devotion</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Might once have stray’d to superstition.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If all her virtues must have grown, yet might</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Abundant virtue have bred a proud delight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had she persever’d just, there would have been</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some that would sin, misthinking she did sin.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such as would call her friendship, love, and feign</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To sociableness, a name profane,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or sin by tempting, or, not daring that,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By wishing, though they never told her what.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus mightst thou have slain more souls had’st thou not cross’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thyself, and to triumph, thine army lost.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet though these ways be lost, thou hast left one,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which is, immoderate grief that she is gone.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But we may ’scape that sin, yet weep as much;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Our tears are due because we are not such.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some tears, that knot of friends, her death must cost,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Because the chain is broke, but no link lost.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="death" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<hgroup>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Elegy</h3>
					<p epub:type="subtitle">Death</p>
				</hgroup>
				<p>
					<span>Language, thou art too narrow and too weak</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To ease us now; great sorrows cannot speak.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If we could sigh out accents, and weep words,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Grief wears, and lessens, that tears breath affords.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sad hearts, the less they seem, the more they are</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">—So guiltiest men stand mutest at the bar⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not that they know not, feel not their estate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But extreme sense hath made them desperate.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sorrow, to whom we owe all that we be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tyrant, in the fifth and greatest monarchy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was ’t that she did possess all hearts before,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thou hast kill’d her, to make thy empire more?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Knew’st thou some would, that knew her not, lament,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As in a deluge perish th’ innocent?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was ’t not enough to have that palace won,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But thou must raze it too, that was undone?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hadst thou stay’d there, and look’d out at her eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All had adored thee, that now from thee flies;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For they let out more light than they took in,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They told not when, but did the day begin.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She was too sapphirine and clear for thee;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Clay, flint, and jet now thy fit dwellings be.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Alas! she was too pure, but not too weak;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whoe’er saw crystal ordnance but would break?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And if we be thy conquest, by her fall</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thou hast lost thy end; in her we perish all;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or if we live, we live but to rebel,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That know her better now, who knew her well.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If we should vapour out, and pine, and die,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Since she first went, that were not misery.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She changed our world with hers; now she is gone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Mirth and prosperity is oppression;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For of all moral virtues she was all,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That ethics speak of virtues cardinal.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her soul was paradise; the cherubin</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Set to keep it was grace, that kept out sin.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She had no more than let in death, for we</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All reap consumption from one fruitful tree.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>God took her hence, lest some of us should love</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her, like that plant, Him and His laws above;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And when we tears, He mercy shed in this,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To raise our minds to heaven, where now she is</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who if her virtues would have let her stay</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">We had had a saint, have now a holiday.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her heart was that strange bush, where sacred fire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Religion, did not consume, but inspire</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such piety, so chaste use of God’s day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That what we turn to feast, she turn’d to pray;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And did prefigure here, in devout taste,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The rest of her high Sabbath, which shall last.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Angels did hand her up, who next God dwell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For she was of that order whence most fell;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her body’s left with us, lest some had said,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She could not die, except they saw her dead;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For from less virtue, and less beauteousness,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Gentiles framed them gods and goddesses.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The ravenous earth, that now woos her to be</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Earth too, will be a Lemnia, and the tree</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That wraps that crystal in a wooden tomb</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shall be took up spruce, fill’d with diamond.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And we her sad glad friends all bear a part</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of grief, for all would break a Stoic’s heart.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="elegy-on-the-lord-chancellor" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Elegy on the Lord Chancellor</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Sorrow, who to this house scarce knew the way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is, O, heir of it, our all is his prey.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This strange chance claims strange wonder, and to us</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nothing can be so strange as to weep thus.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Tis well his life’s loud-speaking works deserve,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And give praise too, our cold tongues could not serve;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Tis well he kept tears from our eyes before,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That to fit this deep ill we might have store.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O, if a sweet briar climb up by a tree,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If to a paradise that transplanted be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or fell’d, and burnt for holy sacrifice,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet that must wither which by it did rise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As we for him dead; though no family</span>
					<br/>
					<span>E’er rigg’d a soul for heaven’s discovery</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With whom more venturers more boldly dare</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Venture their states, with him in joy to share,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We lose what all friends loved, him; he gains now</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But life by death, which worst foes would allow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If he could have foes, in whose practice grew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All virtues, whose name subtle schoolmen knew.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What ease can hope that we shall see him beget,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When we must die first, and cannot die yet?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His children are his pictures; O, they be</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pictures of him dead, senseless, cold as he.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Here needs no marble tomb, since he is gone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He, and about him his, are turn’d to stone.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="a-hymn-to-the-saints-and-to-marquis-hamilton" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">A Hymn to the Saints, and to Marquis Hamilton</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Whether that soul which now comes up to you</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fill any former rank, or make a new;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whether it take a name named there before,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or be a name itself and order more</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than was in heaven till now⁠—for may not he</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Be so, if every several angel be</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A kind alone? whatever order grow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Greater by him in heaven, we do not so.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One of your orders grows by his access,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But, by his loss, grow all our orders less;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The name of father, master, friend, the name</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of subject and of prince, in one is lame;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fair mirth is damp’d, and conversation black,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Household widow’d, and the Garter slack;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Chapel wants an ear, Council a tongue;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Story, a theme; and Music lacks a song.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Blest order that hath him, the loss of him</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gangrened all orders here; all lost a limb.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Never made body such haste to confess</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What a soul was; all former comeliness</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fled, in a minute, when the soul was gone;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, having lost that beauty, would have none.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So fell our monasteries, in an instant grown</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not to less houses, but to heaps of stone;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So sent his body that fair form it wore</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unto the sphere of forms, and doth⁠—before</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His soul shall fill up his sepulchral stone⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Anticipate a resurrection.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For, as in his fame now his soul is here,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So, in the form thereof, his body’s there;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And if, fair soul, not with first Innocents</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy station be, but with the Penitents,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>—And who shall dare to ask then, when I am</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dyed scarlet in the blood of that pure Lamb,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whether that colour, which is scarlet then,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Were black or white before in eyes of men?⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When thou rememb’rest what sins thou didst find</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Amongst those many friends now left behind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And seest such sinners, as they are, with thee</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Got thither by repentance, let it be</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy wish to wish all there, to wish them clean,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wish him a David, her a Magdalen.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
		</article>
	</body>
</html>
