<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Epigrams</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<article id="epigrams" epub:type="part">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Epigrams</h2>
			<article id="hero-and-leander" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Hero and Leander</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Both robb’d of air, we both lie in one ground;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Both whom one fire had burnt, one water drown’d</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="pyramus-and-thisbe" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Pyramus and Thisbe</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Two, by themselves, each other, love and fear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Slain, cruel friends, by parting have join’d here.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="niobe" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Niobe</h3>
				<p>
					<span>By children’s births, and death, I am become</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So dry, that I am now mine own sad tomb.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="a-burnt-ship" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">A Burnt Ship</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Out of a fired ship, which by no way</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But drowning could be rescued from the flame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some men leap’d forth, and ever as they came</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Near the foes’ ships, did by their shot decay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So all were lost, which in the ship were found,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They in the sea being burnt, they in the burnt ship drowned.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="fall-of-a-wall" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Fall of a Wall</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Under an undermined and shot-bruised wall</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A too-bold captain perish’d by the fall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose brave misfortune happiest men envied,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That had a town for tomb, his bones to hide.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="a-lame-beggar" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">A Lame Beggar</h3>
				<p>
					<span>I am unable, yonder beggar cries,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To stand, or move; if he say true, he lies.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="cales-and-guyana" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Cales and Guyana</h3>
				<p>
					<span>If you from spoil of th’ old world’s farthest end</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To the new world your kindled valours bend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What brave examples then do prove it true</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That one thing’s end doth still begin a new.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sir-john-wingefield" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Sir John Wingfield</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Beyond th’ old Pillars many have travalled</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Towards the sun’s cradle, and his throne, and bed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A fitter pillar our Earl did bestow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In that late island; for he well did know</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Farther than Wingfield no man dares to go.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="a-self-accuser" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">A Self-Accuser</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Your mistress, that you follow whores, still taxeth you;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Tis strange that she should thus confess it, though ’t be true.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="a-licentious-person" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">A Licentious Person</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Thy sins and hairs may no man equal call;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For, as thy sins increase, thy hairs do fall.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="antiquary" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Antiquary</h3>
				<p>
					<span>If in his study he hath so much care</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To hang all old strange things, let his wife beware.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="disinherited" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Disinherited</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Thy father all from thee, by his last will,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gave to the poor; thou hast good title still.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="phryne" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Phryne</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Thy flattering picture, Phryne, is like thee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Only in this, that you both painted be.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="an-obscure-writer" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">An Obscure Writer</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Philo with twelve years’ study hath been grieved</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To be understood; when will he be believed?</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="klockius" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Klockius</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Klockius so deeply hath sworn ne’er more to come</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In bawdy house, that he dares not go home.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="raderus" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Raderus</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Why this man gelded Martial I muse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Except himself alone his tricks would use,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As Katherine, for the court’s sake, put down stews.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="mercurius-gallo-belgicus" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Mercurius Gallo-Belgicus</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Like Esop’s fellow-slaves, O Mercury,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which could do all things, thy faith is; and I</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like Esop’s self, which nothing. I confess</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I should have had more faith, if thou hadst less.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy credit lost thy credit. ’Tis sin to do,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In this case, as thou wouldst be done unto,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To believe all. Change thy name; thou art like</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mercury in stealing, but liest like a Greek.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="ralphius" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Ralphius</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Compassion in the world again is bred;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ralphius is sick, the broker keeps his bed.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="the-liar" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">The Liar</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Thou in the fields walk’st out thy supping hours</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And yet thou swear’st thou hast supped like a king;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like Nebuchadnezar perchance with grass and flowers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A salad worse then Spanish dieting.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
		</article>
	</body>
</html>
