<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Epithalamions or Marriage Songs</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<article id="epithalamions-or-marriage-songs" epub:type="part">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Epithalamions or Marriage Songs</h2>
			<article id="marriage-song-on-the-lady-elizabeth-and-count-palatine" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">An Epithalamion, or Marriage Song on the Lady Elizabeth and Count Palatine Being Married on <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">St.</abbr> Valentine’s Day</h3>
				<section id="marriage-song-on-the-lady-elizabeth-and-count-palatine-1">
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Hail Bishop Valentine, whose day this is;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">All the air is thy diocese,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">And all the chirping choristers</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And other birds are thy parishioners;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">Thou marriest every year</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The lyric lark, and the grave whispering dove,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The sparrow that neglects his life for love,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The household bird with the red stomacher;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">Thou makest the blackbird speed as soon,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As doth the goldfinch, or the halcyon;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The husband cock looks out, and straight is sped,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And meets his wife, which brings her feather-bed.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>This day more cheerfully than ever shine;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>This day, which might inflame thyself, old Valentine.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="marriage-song-on-the-lady-elizabeth-and-count-palatine-2">
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Till now, thou warm’d’st with multiplying loves</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">Two larks, two sparrows, or two doves;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">All that is nothing unto this;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For thou this day couplest two phoenixes;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">Thou makst a taper see</span>
						<br/>
						<span>What the sun never saw, and what the ark</span>
						<br/>
						<span>—Which was of fowls and beasts the cage and park⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Did not contain, one bed contains, through thee;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">Two phoenixes, whose joined breasts</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Are unto one another mutual nests,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Where motion kindles such fires as shall give</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Young phoenixes, and yet the old shall live;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Whose love and courage never shall decline,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But make the whole year through, thy day, O Valentine.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="marriage-song-on-the-lady-elizabeth-and-count-palatine-3">
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Up then, fair phoenix bride, frustrate the sun;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">Thyself from thine affection</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">Takest warmth enough, and from thine eye</span>
						<br/>
						<span>All lesser birds will take their jollity.</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">Up, up, fair bride, and call</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thy stars from out their several boxes, take</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thy rubies, pearls, and diamonds forth, and make</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thyself a constellation of them all;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">And by their blazing signify</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That a great princess falls, but doth not die.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Be thou a new star, that to us portends</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Ends of much wonder; and be thou those ends.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Since thou dost this day in new glory shine,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>May all men date records from this day, Valentine.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="marriage-song-on-the-lady-elizabeth-and-count-palatine-4">
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Come forth, come forth, and as one glorious flame</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">Meeting another grows the same,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">So meet thy Frederick, and so</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To an inseparable union go,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">Since separation</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Falls not on such things as are infinite,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Nor things, which are but one, can disunite.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>You’re twice inseparable, great, and one;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">Go then to where the bishop stays,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To make you one, his way, which divers ways</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Must be effected; and when all is past,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And that you’re one, by hearts and hands made fast,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>You two have one way left, yourselves to entwine,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Besides this bishop’s knot, of Bishop Valentine.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="marriage-song-on-the-lady-elizabeth-and-count-palatine-5">
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">V</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>But O, what ails the sun, that here he stays,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">Longer to-day than other days?</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">Stays he new light from these to get?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And finding here such stars, is loth to set?</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">And why do you two walk,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So slowly paced in this procession?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Is all your care but to be look’d upon,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And be to others spectacle and talk?</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">The feast with gluttonous delays</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Is eaten, and too long their meat they praise;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The masquers come late, and I think, will stay,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Like fairies, till the cock crow them away.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Alas! did not antiquity assign</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A night as well as day, to thee, old Valentine?</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="marriage-song-on-the-lady-elizabeth-and-count-palatine-6">
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VI</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>They did, and night is come; and yet we see</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">Formalities retarding thee.</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">What mean these ladies, which⁠—as though</span>
						<br/>
						<span>They were to take a clock in pieces⁠—go</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">So nicely about the bride?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A bride, before a “Good-night” could be said,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Should vanish from her clothes into her bed,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As souls from bodies steal, and are not spied.</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">But now she’s laid; what though she be?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Yet there are more delays, for where is he?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He comes and passeth through sphere after sphere;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>First her sheets, then her arms, then anywhere.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Let not this day, then, but this night be thine;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thy day was but the eve to this, O Valentine.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="marriage-song-on-the-lady-elizabeth-and-count-palatine-7">
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VII</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Here lies a she sun, and a he moon there;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">She gives the best light to his sphere;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">Or each is both, and all, and so</span>
						<br/>
						<span>They unto one another nothing owe;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">And yet they do, but are</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So just and rich in that coin which they pay,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That neither would, nor needs forbear, nor stay;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Neither desires to be spared nor to spare.</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">They quickly pay their debt, and then</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Take no acquittances, but pay again;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>They pay, they give, they lend, and so let fall</span>
						<br/>
						<span>No such occasion to be liberal.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>More truth, more courage in these two do shine,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Than all thy turtles have and sparrows, Valentine.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="marriage-song-on-the-lady-elizabeth-and-count-palatine-8">
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VIII</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>And by this act of these two phoenixes</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">Nature again restorèd is;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">For since these two are two no more,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>There’s but one phoenix still, as was before.</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">Rest now at last, and we⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As satyrs watch the sun’s uprise⁠—will stay</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Waiting when your eyes opened let out day,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Only desired because your face we see.</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">Others near you shall whispering speak,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And wagers lay, at which side day will break,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And win by observing, then, whose hand it is</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That opens first a curtain, hers or his:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>This will be tried to-morrow after nine,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Till which hour, we thy day enlarge, O Valentine.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
			</article>
			<article id="eclogue-1613-december-26" epub:type="z3998:drama z3998:scene">
				<hgroup>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Eclogue</h3>
					<p epub:type="subtitle">1613, December 26</p>
				</hgroup>
				<p>Allophanes finding Idios in the country in Christmas time, reprehends his absence from court, at the marriage of the Earl of Somerset; Idios gives an account of his purpose therein, and of his actions there.</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Allophanes</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Unseasonable man, statue of ice,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What could to country’s solitude entice</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thee, in this year’s cold and decrepit time?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Nature’s instinct draws to the warmer clime</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Even smaller birds, who by that courage dare</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In numerous fleets sail through their sea, the air.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What delicacy can in fields appear,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Whilst Flora herself doth a frieze jerkin wear?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Whilst winds do all the trees and hedges strip</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of leaves, to furnish rods enough to whip</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thy madness from thee, and all springs by frost</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Have taken cold, and their sweet murmurs lost?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If thou thy faults or fortunes wouldst lament</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With just solemnity, do it in Lent.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>At court the spring already advanced is,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The sun stays longer up; and yet not his</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The glory is; far other, other fires.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>First, zeal to prince and state, then love’s desires</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Burn in one breast, and like heaven’s two great lights,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The first doth govern days, the other, nights.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And then that early light which did appear</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Before the sun and moon created were,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The prince’s favour, is diffused o’er all,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>From which all fortunes, names, and natures fall.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Then from those wombs of stars, the bride’s bright eyes,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>At every glance, a constellation flies,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And sows the court with stars, and doth prevent</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In light and power, the all-eyed firmament.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>First her eyes kindle other ladies’ eyes,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Then from their beams their jewels’ lustres rise,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And from their jewels torches do take fire,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And all is warmth, and light, and good desire.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Most other courts, alas! are like to hell,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Where in dark places, fire without light doth dwell;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or but like stoves; for lust and envy get</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Continual, but artificial heat.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Here zeal and love grown one all clouds digest,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And make our court an everlasting east.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And canst thou be from thence?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Idios</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>No, I am there;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As heaven⁠—to men disposed⁠—is everywhere,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>So are those courts, whose princes animate</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Not only all their house but all their state.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Let no man think, because he’s full, he hath all.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Kings⁠—as their pattern, God⁠—are liberal</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Not only in fullness, but capacity,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Enlarging narrow men to feel and see,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And comprehend the blessings they bestow.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>So, reclused hermits oftentimes do know</span>
									<br/>
									<span>More of heaven’s glory than a worldling can.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As man is of the world, the heart of man</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Is an epitome of God’s great book</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of creatures, and man need no farther look;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>So is the country of courts, where sweet peace doth,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As their own common soul, give life to both;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And am I then from court?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Allophanes</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Dreamer, thou art:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Think’st thou, fantastic, that thou hast a part</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In the Indian fleet, because thou hast</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A little spice or amber in thy taste?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Because thou art not frozen, art thou warm?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Seest thou all good, because thou seest no harm?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The earth doth in her inner bowels hold</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Stuff well-disposed, and which would fain be gold;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But never shall, except it chance to lie</span>
									<br/>
									<span>So upward, that heaven gild it with his eye.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As, for divine things, faith comes from above,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>So, for best civil use, all tinctures move</span>
									<br/>
									<span>From higher powers; from God religion springs,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Wisdom and honour from the use of kings:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Then unbeguile thyself, and know with me,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That angels, though on earth employ’d they be,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Are still in heaven, so he is still at home</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That doth abroad to honest actions come.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Chide thyself then, O fool, which yesterday</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Mightst have read bewray; more than all thy books</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Hast thou a history, which doth present</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A court, where all affections do assent</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Unto the king’s, and that that king’s are just;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And where it is no levity to trust;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Where there is no ambition, but to obey;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Where men need whisper nothing, and yet may;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Where the king’s favours are so placed, that all</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Find that the king therein is liberal</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To them, in him, because his favours bend</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To virtue, to the which they all pretend?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thou hast no such; yet here was this, and more.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>An earnest lover, wise then, and before,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Our little Cupid hath sued livery,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And is no more in his minority;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He is admitted now into that breast</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Where the king’s counsels and his secrets rest.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What hast thou lost, O ignorant man?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Idios</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I knew</span>
									<br/>
									<span>All this, and only therefore I withdrew.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To know and feel all this, and not to have</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Words to express it, makes a man a grave</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of his own thoughts; I would not therefore stay</span>
									<br/>
									<span>At a great feast, having no grace to say.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And yet I ’scaped not here; for being come,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Full of the common joy, I utter’d some.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Read then this nuptial song, which was not made</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Either the court or men’s hearts to invade;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But since I’m dead and buried, I could frame</span>
									<br/>
									<span>No epitaph, which might advance my fame</span>
									<br/>
									<span>So much as this poor song, which testifies</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I did unto that day some sacrifice.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td epub:type="z3998:song">
								<header>
									<p>Epithalamion</p>
								</header>
								<div>
									<header>
										<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</p>
										<p>The Time of the Marriage</p>
									</header>
									<p>
										<span>Thou art reprieved, old year, thou shalt not die;</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">Though thou upon thy death-bed lie,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">And should’st within five days expire,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Yet thou art rescued by a mightier fire,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">Than thy old soul, the sun,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>When he doth in his largest circle run.</span>
										<br/>
										<span>The passage of the west or east would thaw,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>And open wide their easy liquid jaw</span>
										<br/>
										<span>To all our ships, could a Promethean art</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Either unto the northern pole impart</span>
										<br/>
										<span>The fire of these inflaming eyes, or of this loving heart.</span>
									</p>
								</div>
								<div>
									<header>
										<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</p>
										<p>Equality of Persons</p>
									</header>
									<p>
										<span>But undiscerning Muse, which heart, which eyes,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">In this new couple, dost thou prize,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">When his eye as inflaming is</span>
										<br/>
										<span>As hers, and her heart loves as well as his?</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">Be tried by beauty, and then</span>
										<br/>
										<span>The bridegroom is a maid, and not a man;</span>
										<br/>
										<span>If by that manly courage they be tried,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Which scorns unjust opinion; then the bride</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Becomes a man. Should chance or envy’s art</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Divide these two, whom nature scarce did part,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Since both have the inflaming eye, and both the loving heart?</span>
									</p>
								</div>
								<div>
									<header>
										<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</p>
										<p>Raising of the Bridegroom</p>
									</header>
									<p>
										<span>Though it be some divorce to think of you</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">Single, so much one are you two,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">Let me here contemplate thee,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>First, cheerful bridegroom, and first let me see,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">How thou prevent’st the sun,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>And his red foaming horses dost outrun;</span>
										<br/>
										<span>How, having laid down in thy Sovereign’s breast</span>
										<br/>
										<span>All businesses, from thence to reinvest</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Them when these triumphs cease, thou forward art</span>
										<br/>
										<span>To show to her, who doth the like impart,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>The fire of tby inflaming eyes, and of thy loving heart.</span>
									</p>
								</div>
								<div>
									<header>
										<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</p>
										<p>Raising of the Bride</p>
									</header>
									<p>
										<span>But now to thee, fair bride, it is some wrong,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">To think thou wert in bed so long.</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">Since soon thou liest down first, ’tis fit</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Thou in first rising shouldst allow for it.</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">Powder thy radiant hair,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Which if without such ashes thou wouldst wear,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Thou which, to all which come to look upon,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Wert meant for Phoebus, wouldst be Phaëton.</span>
										<br/>
										<span>For our ease, give thine eyes th’ unusual part</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Of joy, a tear; so quench’d, thou mayst impart,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>To us that come, thy inflaming eyes; to him, thy loving heart.</span>
									</p>
								</div>
								<div>
									<header>
										<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">V</p>
										<p>Her Apparelling</p>
									</header>
									<p>
										<span>Thus thou descend’st to our infirmity,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">Who can the sun in water see.</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">So dost thou, when in silk and gold</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Thou cloud’st thyself; since we which do behold</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">Are dust and worms, ’tis just,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Our objects be the fruits of worms and dust.</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Let every jewel be a glorious star,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Yet stars are not so pure as their spheres are;</span>
										<br/>
										<span>And though thou stoop, to appear to us, in part,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Still in that picture thou entirely art,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Which thy inflaming eyes have made within his loving heart.</span>
									</p>
								</div>
								<div>
									<header>
										<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VI</p>
										<p>Going to the Chapel</p>
									</header>
									<p>
										<span>Now from your easts you issue forth, and we,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">As men, which through a cypress see</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">The rising sun, do think it two;</span>
										<br/>
										<span>So, as you go to church, do think of you;</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">But that veil being gone,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>By the church rites you are from thenceforth one.</span>
										<br/>
										<span>The church triumphant made this match before,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>And now the militant doth strive no more.</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Then, reverend priest, who God’s Recorder art,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Do, from his dictates, to these two impart</span>
										<br/>
										<span>All blessings which are seen, or thought, by angel’s eye or heart.</span>
									</p>
								</div>
								<div>
									<header>
										<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VII</p>
										<p>The Benediction</p>
									</header>
									<p>
										<span>Blest pair of swans, O may you interbring</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">Daily new joys, and never sing;</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">Live, till all grounds of wishes fail,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Till honour, yea, till wisdom grow so stale,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">That new great heights to try,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>It must serve your ambition, to die;</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Raise heirs, and may here, to the world’s end, live</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Heirs from this king, to take thanks, you, to give.</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Nature and grace do all, and nothing art;</span>
										<br/>
										<span>May never age or error overthwart</span>
										<br/>
										<span>With any west these radiant eyes, with any north this heart.</span>
									</p>
								</div>
								<div>
									<header>
										<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VIII</p>
										<p>Feasts and Revels</p>
									</header>
									<p>
										<span>But you are over-blest. Plenty this day</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">Injures; it causeth time to stay;</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">The tables groan, as though this feast</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Would, as the flood, destroy all fowl and beast.</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">And were the doctrine new</span>
										<br/>
										<span>That the earth moved, this day would make it true;</span>
										<br/>
										<span>For every part to dance and revel goes,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>They tread the air, and fall not where they rose.</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Though six hours since the sun to bed did part,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>The masks and banquets will not yet impart</span>
										<br/>
										<span>A sunset to these weary eyes, a centre to this heart.</span>
									</p>
								</div>
								<div>
									<header>
										<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IX</p>
										<p>The Bride’s Going to Bed</p>
									</header>
									<p>
										<span>What mean’st thou, bride, this company to keep?</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">To sit up, till thou fain wouldst sleep?</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">Thou mayst not, when thou’rt laid, do so;</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Thyself must to him a new banquet grow;</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">And you must entertain</span>
										<br/>
										<span>And do all this day’s dances o’er again.</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Know that if sun and moon together do</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Rise in one point, they do not set so too.</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Therefore thou mayst, fair bride, to bed depart;</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Thou art not gone, being gone; where’er thou art,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Thou leavest in him thy watchful eyes, in him thy loving heart.</span>
									</p>
								</div>
								<div>
									<header>
										<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">X</p>
										<p>The Bridegroom’s Coming</p>
									</header>
									<p>
										<span>As he that sees a star fall, runs apace,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">And finds a jelly in the place,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">So doth the bridegroom haste as much,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Being told this star is fallen, and finds her such.</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">And as friends may look strange,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>By a new fashion, or apparel’s change,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Their souls, though long acquainted they had been,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>These clothes, their bodies, never yet had seen.</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Therefore at first she modestly might start,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>But must forthwith surrender every part,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>As freely as each to each before gave either eye or heart.</span>
									</p>
								</div>
								<div>
									<header>
										<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XI</p>
										<p>The Good-Night</p>
									</header>
									<p>
										<span>Now, as in Tullia’s tomb, one lamp burnt clear,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">Unchanged for fifteen hundred year,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">May these love-lamps we here enshrine,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>In warmth, light, lasting, equal the divine.</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">Fire ever doth aspire,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>And makes all like itself, turns all to fire,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>But ends in ashes; which these cannot do,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>For none of these is fuel, but fire too.</span>
										<br/>
										<span>This is joy’s bonfire, then, where love’s strong arts</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Make of so noble individual parts</span>
										<br/>
										<span>One fire of four inflaming eyes, and of two loving hearts.</span>
									</p>
								</div>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Idios</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>As I have brought this song, that I may do</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A perfect sacrifice, I’ll burn it too.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>No, sir. This paper I have justly got,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For, in burnt incense, the perfume is not</span>
									<br/>
									<span>His only that presents it, but of all;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Whatever celebrates this festival</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Is common, since the joy thereof is so.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Nor may yourself be priest; but let me go</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Back to the court, and I will lay it upon</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Such altars, as prize your devotion.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
			</article>
			<article id="epithalamion-made-at-lincolns-inn" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Epithalamion Made at Lincoln’s Inn</h3>
				<p>
					<span>The sunbeams in the east are spread;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Leave, leave, fair bride, your solitary bed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">No more shall you return to it alone;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It nurseth sadness, and your body’s print,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like to a grave, the yielding down doth dint;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">You, and your other you, meet there anon.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Put forth, put forth, that warm balm-breathing thigh,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which when next time you in these sheets will smother,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There it must meet another,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Which never was, but must be, oft, more nigh.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Come glad from thence, go gladder than you came;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To-day put on perfection, and a woman’s name.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Daughters of London, you which be</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our golden mines, and furnish’d treasury;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">You which are angels, yet still bring with you</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thousands of angels on your marriage days;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Help with your presence, and devise to praise</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">These rites, which also unto you grow due;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Conceitedly dress her, and be assign’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By you fit place for every flower and jewel;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Make her for love fit fuel,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">As gay as Flora and as rich as <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>nd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So may she, fair and rich, in nothing lame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To-day put on perfection, and a woman’s name.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And you frolic patricians,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sons of those senators, wealth’s deep oceans;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ye painted courtiers, barrels of other’s wits;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ye countrymen, who but your beasts love none;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ye of those fellowships, whereof he’s one,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of study and play made strange hermaphrodites,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Here shine; this bridegroom to the temple bring.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lo, in yon path which store of strew’d flowers graceth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The sober virgin paceth;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Except my sight fail, ’tis no other thing.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Weep not, nor blush, here is no grief nor shame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To-day put on perfection, and a woman’s name.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thy two-leaved gates, fair temple, unfold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And these two in thy sacred bosom hold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till mystically join’d but one they be;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then may thy lean and hunger-starved womb</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Long time expect their bodies, and their tomb,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Long after their own parents fatten thee.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All elder claims, and all cold barrenness,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All yielding to new loves, be far for ever,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which might these two dissever;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Always, all th’other may each one possess;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For the best bride, best worthy of praise and fame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To-day puts on perfection, and a woman’s name.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Winter days bring much delight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not for themselves, but for they soon bring night;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Other sweets wait thee than these diverse meats,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Other disports than dancing jollities,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Other love-tricks than glancing with the eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But that the sun still in our half sphere sweats;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He flies in winter, but he now stands still.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet shadows turn; noon point he hath attain’d;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His steeds will be restrain’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">But gallop lively down the western hill.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou shalt, when he hath run the heaven’s half frame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To-night put on perfection, and a woman’s name.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The amorous evening star is rose,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Why then should not our amorous star inclose</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Herself in her wish’d bed? Release your strings,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Musicians; and dancers take some truce</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With these your pleasing labours, for great use</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As much weariness as perfection brings.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">You, and not only you, but all toil’d beasts</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rest duly; at night all their toils are dispensed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But in their beds commenced</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Are other labours, and more dainty feasts.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She goes a maid, who, lest she turn the same,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To-night puts on perfection, and a woman’s name.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thy virgin’s girdle now untie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in thy nuptial bed, love’s altar, lie</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A pleasing sacrifice; now dispossess</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thee of these chains and robes, which were put on</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To adorn the day, not thee; for thou, alone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like virtue and truth, art best in nakedness.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This bed is only to virginity</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A grave, but to a better state, a cradle.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till now thou wast but able</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">To be, what now thou art; then, that by thee</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No more be said, “I may be,” but “I am,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To-night put on perfection, and a woman’s name.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Even like a faithful man content,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That this life for a better should be spent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So she a mother’s rich stile doth prefer,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And at the bridegroom’s wish’d approach doth lie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like an appointed lamb, when tenderly</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The priest comes on his knees, to embowel her.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now sleep or watch with more joy; and, O light</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of heaven, to-morrow rise thou hot, and early;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This sun will love so dearly</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Her rest, that long, long we shall want her sight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wonders are wrought, for she, which had no maim,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To-night puts on perfection, and a woman’s name.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
		</article>
	</body>
</html>
