<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Epitaphs</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<article id="epitaphs" epub:type="part">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Epitaphs</h2>
			<article id="elegy" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<hgroup>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Epitaph on Himself</h3>
					<p epub:type="subtitle">To the Countess of Bedford</p>
				</hgroup>
				<p>
					<span class="i1"><b>Madam</b>,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That I might make your cabinet my tomb,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And for my fame, which I love next my soul,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Next to my soul provide the happiest room,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Admit to that place this last funeral scroll.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Others by wills give legacies, but I</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Dying, of you do beg a legacy.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>My fortune and my will this custom break,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When we are senseless grown to make stones speak,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though no stone tell thee what I was, yet thou</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In my grave’s inside see what thou art now,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet thou’rt not yet so good; till us death lay</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To ripe and mellow there, we’re stubborn clay.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Parents make us earth, and souls dignify</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Us to be glass; here to grow gold we lie.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whilst in our souls sin bred and pamper’d is,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our souls become worm-eaten carcases.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="on-himself" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Omnibus</h3>
				<p>
					<span>My fortune and my choice this custom break,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When we are speechless grown to make stones speak.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though no stone tell thee what I was, yet thou</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In my grave’s inside seest what thou art now,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet thou’rt not yet so good; till us death lay</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To ripe and mellow here, we’re stubborn clay.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Parents make us earth, and souls dignify</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Us to be glass; here to grow gold we lie.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whilst in our souls sin bred and pamper’d is,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our souls become worm-eaten carcases,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So we ourselves miraculously destroy.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Here bodies with less miracle enjoy</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such privileges, enabled here to scale</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Heaven, when the trumpet’s air shall them exhale,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hear this, and mend thyself, and thou mend’st me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By making me, being dead, do good for thee;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And think me well composed, that I could now</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A last sick hour to syllables allow.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
		</article>
	</body>
</html>
