<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Infinitati Sacrum: Metempsychosis</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<article id="infinitati-sacrum" epub:type="part">
			<header>
				<hgroup>
					<h2 epub:type="title" xml:lang="la">Infinitati Sacrum</h2>
					<p epub:type="subtitle">Metempsychosis</p>
				</hgroup>
				<div epub:type="bridgehead" xml:lang="la">
					<p>16 Augusti, 1601.</p>
					<p>Poëma Satyricon.</p>
				</div>
			</header>
			<section id="infinitati-sacrum-1" epub:type="prologue">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Epistle</h3>
				<p>Others at the porches and entries of their buildings set their arms; I, my picture; if any colours can deliver a mind so plain, and flat, and through-light as mine. Naturally, at a new author I doubt, and stick, and do not say quickly “Good.” I censure much and tax; and this liberty costs me more than others, by how much my own things are worse than others. Yet I would not be so rebellious against myself, as not to do it, since I love it; nor so unjust to others, to do it <i xml:lang="la">sine talione</i>. As long as I give them as good hold upon me, they must pardon me my bitings. I forbid no reprehender, but him that like the Trent Council forbids not books, but authors, damning whatever such a name hath or shall write. None writes so ill, that he gives not something exemplary to follow, or fly. Now when I begin this book, I have no purpose to come into any man’s debt; how my stock will hold out I know not; perchance waste, perchance increase in use. If I do borrow anything of antiquity, besides that I make account that I pay it to posterity, with as much, and as good, you shall still find me to acknowledge it, and to thank not him only that hath digged out treasure for me, but that hath lighted me a candle to the place. All which I will bid you remember (for I will have no such readers as I can teach) is, that the Pythagorean doctrine doth not only carry one soul from man to man, nor man to beast, but indifferently to plants also: and therefore you must not grudge to find the same soul in an Emperor, in a Post-horse, and in a Macaron, since no unreadiness in the soul, but an indisposition in the organs works this. And therefore though this soul could not move when it was a Melon, yet it may remember, and can now tell me, at what lascivious banquet it was served. And though it could not speak, when it was a Spider, yet it can remember, and now tell me, who used it for poison to attain dignity. However the bodies have dulled her other faculties, her memory hath ever been her own, which makes me so seriously deliver you by her relation all her passages from her first making when she was that apple which Eve eat, to this time when she is he, whose life you shall find in the end of this book.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="infinitati-sacrum-2" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<hgroup>
					<h3 epub:type="title">The Progress of the Soul</h3>
					<p epub:type="subtitle">First Song</p>
				</hgroup>
				<section id="infinitati-sacrum-2-1">
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>I sing the progress of a deathless soul,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Whom fate, which God made, but doth not control,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Placed in most shapes; all times, before the law</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Yoked us, and when, and since, in this I sing.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And the great world to his agèd evening</span>
						<br/>
						<span>From infant morn, through manly noon, I draw.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>What the gold Chaldee, or silver Persian saw,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Greek brass, or Roman iron, is in this one;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A work to outwear Seth’s pillars, brick and stone,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And⁠—Holy Writ’s excepted⁠—made to yield to none.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="infinitati-sacrum-2-2">
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Thee, eye of heaven, this great soul envies not.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By thy male force is all we have begot;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In the first east thou now begin’st to shine,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Suck’st early balm, and island spices there,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And wilt anon in thy loose-rein’d career</span>
						<br/>
						<span>At Tagus, Po, Seine, Thames, and Danow dine,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And see at night thy western land of mine;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Yet hast thou not more nations seen than she,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That before thee one day began to be,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And thy frail light being quench’d, shall long, long outlive thee.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="infinitati-sacrum-2-3">
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Nor holy Janus, in whose sovereign boat</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The church, and all the monarchies did float!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That swimming college, and free hospital</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of all mankind, that cage and vivary</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of fowls, and beasts, in whose womb,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Destiny Us and our latest nephews did install</span>
						<br/>
						<span>—From thence are all derived, that fill this All⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Didst thou in that great stewardship embark</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So divers shapes into that floating park,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">As have been moved and inform’d by this heavenly spark.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="infinitati-sacrum-2-4">
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Thou Great Destiny, the commissary of God,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That hast mark’d out a path and period</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For everything, who, where we off-spring took,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Our ways and ends seest at one instant. Thou</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Knot of all causes, thou whose changeless brow</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Ne’er smiles nor frowns, O vouchsafe thou to look</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And show my story, in thy eternal book.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That⁠—if my prayer be fit⁠—I may understand</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So much myself, as to know with what hand,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">How scant or liberal this my life’s race is spann’d.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="infinitati-sacrum-2-5">
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">V</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>To my six lusters almost now outwore,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Except thy book owe me so many more,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Except my legend be free from the lets</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of steep ambition, sleepy poverty,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Spirit-quenching sickness, dull captivity,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Distracting business, and from beauty’s nets,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And all that calls from this, and to others whets,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>O let me not launch out, but let me save</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Th’ expense of brain and spirit, that my grave</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">His right and due, a whole unwasted man may have.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="infinitati-sacrum-2-6">
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VI</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>But if my days be long, and good enough,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In vain this sea shall enlarge or enrough</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Itself; for I will through the wave and foam.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And shall in sad lone ways, a lively sprite,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Make my dark heavy poem light, and light.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For though through many straits and lands I roam,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I launch at Paradise, and I sail towards home;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The course I there began shall here be stay’d,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Sails hoiséd there, struck here, and anchors laid</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">In Thames, which were at Tigris and Euphrates weigh’d.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="infinitati-sacrum-2-7">
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VII</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>For the great soul which here amongst us now</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Doth dwell, and moves that hand, and tongue, and brow,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Which, as the moon the sea, moves us; to hear</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Whose story with long patience you will long</span>
						<br/>
						<span>—For ’tis the crown and last strain of my song⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>This soul, to whom Luther and Mahomet were</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Prisons of flesh; this soul, which oft did tear</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And mend the wracks of th’ empire, and late Rome,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And lived when every great change did come,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Had first in Paradise a low, but fatal room.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="infinitati-sacrum-2-8">
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VIII</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Yet nor low room, nor than the greatest, less,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>If as devout and sharp men fitly guess⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That Cross, our joy, and grief⁠—where nails did tie</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That All, which always was all, everywhere;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Which could not sin, and yet all sins did bear;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Which could not die, yet could not choose but die⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Stood in the self-same room in Calvary,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Where first grew the forbidden learned tree,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For on that tree hung in security</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">This soul made by the Maker’s will from pulling free.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="infinitati-sacrum-2-9">
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IX</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Prince of the orchard, fair as dawning morn,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Fenced with the law, and ripe as soon as born,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That apple grew, which this soul did enlive</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Till the then climbing serpent, that now creeps</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For that offence, for which all mankind weeps,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Took it, and to her whom the first man did wive</span>
						<br/>
						<span>—Whom and her race only forbiddings drive⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He gave it, she to her husband; both did eat;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So perished the eaters, and the meat;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And we⁠—for treason taints the blood⁠—thence die and sweat.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="infinitati-sacrum-2-10">
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">X</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Man all at once was there by woman slain,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And one by one we’re here slain o’er again</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By them. The mother poison’d the well-head,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The daughters here corrupt us, rivulets;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>No smallness ’scapes, no greatness breaks their nets;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>She thrust us out, and by them we are led</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Astray, from turning to whence we are fled.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Were prisoners judges, ’twould seem rigorous;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>She sinned, we bear; part of our pain is, thus</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">To love them whose fault to this painful love yoked us.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="infinitati-sacrum-2-11">
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XI</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>So fast in us doth this corruption grow,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That now we dare ask why we should be so.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Would God⁠—disputes the curious rebel⁠—make</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A law, and would not have it kept? Or can</span>
						<br/>
						<span>His creatures’ will cross His? Of every man</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For one, will God (and be just) vengeance take?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Who sinn’d? ’twas not forbidden to the snake</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Nor her, who was not then made; nor is ’t writ</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That Adam cropp’d, or knew the apple; yet</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">The worm and she, and he, and we endure for it.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="infinitati-sacrum-2-12">
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XII</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>But snatch me, heavenly spirit, from this vain</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Reckoning their vanities; less is their gain</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Than hazard still, to meditate on ill,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Though with good mind; their reason’s like those toys</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of glassy bubbles, which the gamesome boys</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Stretch to so nice a thinness through a quill</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That they themselves break, and do themselves spill.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Arguing is heretics’ game, and exercise</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As wrestlers perfects them. Not liberties</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Of speech, but silence; hands, not tongues, end heresies.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="infinitati-sacrum-2-13">
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIII</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Just in that instant when the serpent’s gripe</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Broke the slight veins, and tender conduit pipe,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Through which this soul from the tree’s root did draw</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Life and growth to this apple, fled away</span>
						<br/>
						<span>This loose soul, old, one and another day.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As lightning, which one scarce dares say he saw,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>’Tis so soon gone⁠—and better proof the law</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of sense than faith requires⁠—swiftly she flew</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To a dark and foggy plot; her, her fates threw</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">There through th’ earth-pores, and in a plant housed her anew.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="infinitati-sacrum-2-14">
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIV</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>The plant thus abled to itself did force</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A place, where no place was; by nature’s course,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As air from water, water fleets away</span>
						<br/>
						<span>From thicker bodies, by this root throng’d so</span>
						<br/>
						<span>His spongy confines gave him place to grow;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Just as in our streets, when the people stay</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To see the Prince, and so fill up the way</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That weasels scarce could pass, when she comes near</span>
						<br/>
						<span>They throng and cleave up, and a passage clear,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">As if for that time their round bodies flatten’d were.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="infinitati-sacrum-2-15">
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XV</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>His right arm he thrust out towards the east,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Westward his left; th’ ends did themselves digest</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Into ten lesser strings; these fingers were;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And as a slumberer stretching on his bed,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>This way he this, and that way scattered</span>
						<br/>
						<span>His other leg, which feet with toes upbear.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Grew on his middle part, the first day, hair,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To show that in love’s business he should still</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A dealer be, and be used well, or ill.</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">His apples kindle; he leaves force of conception kill.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="infinitati-sacrum-2-16">
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XVI</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>A mouth, but dumb, he hath; blind eyes, deat ears;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And to his shoulders dangle subtle hairs;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A young Colossus, there he stands upright;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And as that ground by him were conquered,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A leafy garland wears he on his head</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Enchased with little fruits, so red and bright,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That for them you would call your love’s lips white,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So, of a lone unhaunted place possess’d,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Did this soul’s second inn, built by the guest,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">This living buried man, this quiet mandrake, rest.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="infinitati-sacrum-2-17">
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XVII</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>No lustful woman came this plant to grieve,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But ’twas because there was none yet but Eve;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And she⁠—with other purpose⁠—kill’d it quite.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Her sin had now brought in infirmities,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And so her cradled child the moist-red eyes</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Had never shut, nor slept since it saw light.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Poppy she knew, she knew the mandrake’s might;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And tore up both, and so cool’d her child’s blood.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Unvirtuous weeds might long unvex’d have stood;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">But he’s short-lived that with his death can do most good.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="infinitati-sacrum-2-18">
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XVIII</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>To an unfetter’d soul’s quick nimble haste</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Are falling stars and hearts’ thoughts but slow-paced.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thinner than burnt air flies this soul, and she</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Whom four new coming and four parting suns</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Had found, and left the mandrake’s tenant, runs</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thoughtless of change, when her firm destiny</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Confined and enjail’d her, that seemed so free,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Into a small blue shell, the which a poor</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Warm bird o’erspread, and sat still evermore,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Till her enclosed child kick’d, and pick’d itself a door.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="infinitati-sacrum-2-19">
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIX</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Out crept a sparrow, this soul’s moving inn,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>On whose raw arms stiff feathers now begin,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As children’s teeth through gums, to break with pain;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>His flesh is jelly yet, and his bones threads;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>All a new downy mantle overspreads;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A mouth he opes, which would as much contain</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As his late house, and the first hour speaks plain,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And chirps aloud for meat. Meat fit for men</span>
						<br/>
						<span>His father steals for him, and so feeds then</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">One that, within a month, will beat him from his hen.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="infinitati-sacrum-2-20">
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XX</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>In this world’s youth wise Nature did make haste,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Things ripen’d sooner, and did longer last.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Already this hot cock in bush and tree</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In field and tent o’erflutters his next hen;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He asks her not, who did so taste, nor when,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Nor if his sister or his niece she be;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Nor doth she pule for his inconstancy</span>
						<br/>
						<span>If in her sight he change, nor doth refuse</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The next that calls; both liberty do use.</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Where store is of both kinds, both kinds may freely choose.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="infinitati-sacrum-2-21">
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXI</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Men, till they took laws which made freedom less,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Their daughters and their sisters did ingress</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Till now, unlawful, therefore ill ’twas not.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So jolly, that it can move this soul, is</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The body, so free of his kindnesses,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That self-preserving it hath now forgot,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And slackeneth so the soul’s and body’s knot,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Which temperance straightens; freely on his she friends,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He blood, and spirit, pith, and marrow spends;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Ill steward of himself, himself in three years ends.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="infinitati-sacrum-2-22">
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXII</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Else might he long have lived; man did not know</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of gummy blood, which doth in holly grow,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>How to make bird-lime, nor how to deceive</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With feign’d calls, his nets, or enwrapping snare,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The free inhabitants of the pliant air.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Man to beget, and woman to conceive,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Ask’d not of roots, nor of cock-sparrows, leave.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Yet chooseth he, though none of these he fears,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Pleasantly three, than straiten’d twenty years,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">To live, and to increase his race himself out-wears.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="infinitati-sacrum-2-23">
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXIII</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>This coal with overblowing quench’d and dead,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The soul from her too active organs fled</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To a brook; a female fish’s sandy roe</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With the male’s jelly newly leaven’d was,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For they had intertouch’d as they did pass;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And one of those small bodies, fitted so,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>This soul inform’d, and abled it to row</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Itself with finny oars, which she did fit.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Her scales seem’d yet of parchment, and as yet</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Perchance a fish, but by no name you could call it.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="infinitati-sacrum-2-24">
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXIV</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>When goodly, like a ship in her full trim,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A swan, so white that you may unto him</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Compare all whiteness, but himself to none,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Glided along, and as he glided watch’d,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And with his arched neck this poor fish catch’d.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>It moved with state, as if to look upon</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Low things it scorn’d, and yet before that one</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Could think he sought it, he had swallow’d clear</span>
						<br/>
						<span>This, and much such, and unblamed devour’d there</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">All, but who too swift, too great, or well armed were.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="infinitati-sacrum-2-25">
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXV</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Now swam a prison in a prison put,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And now this soul in double walls was shut,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Till melted with the swan’s digestive fire,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>She left her house, the fish, and vapour’d forth.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Fate not affording bodies of more worth</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For her as yet, bids her again retire</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To another fish, to any new desire</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Made a new prey; for he that can to none</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Resistance make, nor complaint, sure is gone.</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Weakness invites, but silence feasts oppression.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="infinitati-sacrum-2-26">
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXVI</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Pace with the native stream this fish doth keep,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And journeys with her towards the glassy deep,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But oft retarded, once with a hidden net</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Though with great windows⁠—for when need first taught</span>
						<br/>
						<span>These tricks to catch food, then they were not wrought</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As now, with curious greediness to let</span>
						<br/>
						<span>None ’scape, but few and fit for use to get⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As in this trap a ravenous pike was ta’en,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Who, though himself distress’d, would fain have slain</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">This wretch; so hardly are ill habits left again.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="infinitati-sacrum-2-27">
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXVII</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Here by her smallness she two deaths o’erpass’d;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Once innocence ’scaped, and left the oppressor fast.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The net through-swum, she keeps the liquid path,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And whether she leap up sometimes to breathe</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And suck in air, or find it underneath,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or working parts like mills or limbecs hath</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To make the water thin, and air like faith,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Cares not, but safe the place she’s come unto</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Where fresh with salt waves meet, and what to do</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">She knows not, but between both makes a board or two.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="infinitati-sacrum-2-28">
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXVIII</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>So far from hiding her guests, water is,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That she shows them in bigger quantities</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Than they are. Thus her, doubtful of her way,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For game and not for hunger, a sea-pie</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Spied through this traitorous spectacle, from high,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The silly fish where it disputing lay,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And to end her doubts and her, bears her away.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Exalted she is, but to th’ exalter’s good;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As are by great ones, men which lowly stood,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">It’s raised, to be the raiser’s instrument and food.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="infinitati-sacrum-2-29">
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXIX</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Is any kind subject to rape like fish?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Ill unto man they neither do nor wish;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Fishers they kill not, nor with noise awake;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>They do not hunt, nor strive to make a prey</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of beasts, nor their young sons to bear away;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Fowls they pursue not, nor do undertake</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To spoil the nests industrious birds do make;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Yet them all these unkind kinds feed upon;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To kill them is an occupation,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And laws make fasts and Lents for their destruction.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="infinitati-sacrum-2-30">
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXX</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>A sudden stiff land-wind in that self hour</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To seaward forced this bird, that did devour</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The fish; he cares not, for with ease he flies,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Fat gluttony’s best orator; at last,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So long he hath flown, and hath flown so fast,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That, leagues o’erpast at sea, now tired he lies,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And with his prey, that till then languish’d, dies.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The souls, no longer foes, two ways did err,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The fish I follow, and keep no calendar</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Of th’ other; he lives yet in some great officer.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="infinitati-sacrum-2-31">
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXI</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Into an embryon fish our soul is thrown,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And in due time thrown out again, and grown</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To such vastness, as if unmanacled</span>
						<br/>
						<span>From Greece Morea were, and that, by some</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Earthquake unrooted, loose Morea swum;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or seas from Afric’s body had severed</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And torn the hopeful promontory’s head.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>This fish would seem these, and, when all hopes fail,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A great ship overset, or, without sail</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Hulling might⁠—when this was a whelp⁠—be like this whale.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="infinitati-sacrum-2-32">
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXII</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>At every stroke his brazen fins do take,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>More circles in the broken sea they make</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Than cannons’ voices, when the air they tear.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>His ribs are pillars, and his high arch’d roof</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of bark, that blunts best steel, is thunder-proof.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Swim in him swallow’d dolphins without fear,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And feel no sides, as if his vast womb were</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Some inland sea; and ever as he went</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He spouted rivers up, as if he meant</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">To join our seas with seas above the firmament.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="infinitati-sacrum-2-33">
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXIII</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>He hunts not fish, but, as an officer</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Stays in his court, at his own net, and there</span>
						<br/>
						<span>All suitors of all sorts themselves enthrall,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So on his back lies this whale wantoning,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And in his gulf-like throat sucks everything</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That passeth near; fish chaseth fish, and all,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Flyer and follower, in this whirlpool fall.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Oh, might not states of more equality</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Consist? and is it of necessity</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">That thousand guiltless smalls, to make one great, must die?</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="infinitati-sacrum-2-34">
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXIV</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Now drinks he up seas, and he eats up flocks,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He jostles islands, and he shakes firm rocks.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Now in a roomful house this soul doth float,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And like a prince she sends her faculties</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To all her limbs, distant as provinces.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The sun hath twenty times both crab and goat</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Parched, since first launch’d forth this living boat.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>’Tis greatest now, and to destruction</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Nearest; there’s no pause at perfection;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Greatness a period hath, but hath no station.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="infinitati-sacrum-2-35">
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXV</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Two little fishes, whom he never harm’d,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Nor fed on their kind, two not throughly arm’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With hope that they could kill him, nor could do</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Good to themselves by his death⁠—they did not eat</span>
						<br/>
						<span>His flesh, nor suck those oils, which thence out-streat⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Conspired against him; and it might undo</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The plot of all, that the plotters were two,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But that they fishes were, and could not speak.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>How shall a tyrant wise strong projects break,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">If wretches can on them the common anger wreak?</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="infinitati-sacrum-2-36">
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXVI</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>The flail-finn’d thresher, and steel-beak’d sword-fish</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Only attempt to do what all do wish.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The thresher backs him, and to beat begins;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The sluggard whale yields to oppression,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And to hide himself from shame and danger, down</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Begins to sink; the sword-fish upward spins,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And gores him with his beak; his staff-like fins</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So well the one, his sword the other plies,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That now a scoff, and prey, this tyrant dies,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And⁠—his own dole⁠—feeds⁠—with himself all companies.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="infinitati-sacrum-2-37">
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXVII</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Who will revenge his death? or who will call</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Those to account, that thought and wrought his fall?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The heirs of slain kings, we see, are often so</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Transported with the joy of what they get,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That they revenge and obsequies forget;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Nor will against such men the people go,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Because he’s now dead to whom they should show</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Love in that act; some kings by vice being grown</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So needy of subjects’ love, that of their own</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">They think they lose, if love be to the dead prince shown.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="infinitati-sacrum-2-38">
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXVIII</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>This soul, now free from prison and passion,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Hath yet a little indignation</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That so small hammers should so soon down beat</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So great a castle. And having for her house</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Got the strait cloister of a wretched mouse</span>
						<br/>
						<span>—As basest men, that have not what to eat,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Nor enjoy aught, do far more hate the great</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Than they who good reposed estates possess⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>This soul, late taught that great things might by less</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Be slain, to gallant mischief doth herself address.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="infinitati-sacrum-2-39">
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXIX</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Nature’s great masterpiece, an elephant,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The only harmless great thing, the giant</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of beasts, who thought none had, to make him wise,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But to be just and thankful, loth to offend</span>
						<br/>
						<span>—Yet nature hath given him no knees to bend</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Himself he up-props, on himself relies,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And foe to none, suspects no enemies⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Still sleeping stood; vex’d not his fantasy</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Black dreams; like an unbent bow carelessly</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">His sinewy proboscis did remissly lie.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="infinitati-sacrum-2-40">
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XL</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>In which, as in a gallery, this mouse</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Walk’d, and survey’d the rooms of this vast house,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And to the brain, the soul’s bed-chamber, went,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And gnaw’d the life-cords there. Like a whole town</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Clean undermined, the slain beast tumbled down.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With him the murderer dies, whom envy sent</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To kill, not ’scape; for only he that meant</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To die, did ever kill a man of better room;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And thus he made his foe his prey and tomb.</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Who cares not to turn back, may any whither come.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="infinitati-sacrum-2-41">
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLI</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Next, housed this soul a wolf’s yet unborn whelp,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Till the best midwife, nature, gave it help</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To issue. It could kill, as soon as go.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Abel, as white and mild as his sheep were</span>
						<br/>
						<span>—Who, in that trade of church and kingdoms there</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Was the first type⁠—was still infested so</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With this wolf, that it bred his loss and woe;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And yet his bitch, his sentinel, attends</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The flock so near, so well warns and defends,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">That the wolf⁠—hopeless else⁠—to corrupt her intends.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="infinitati-sacrum-2-42">
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLII</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>He took a course, which since, successfully,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Great men have often taken, to espy</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The counsels, or to break the plots of foes.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To Abel’s tent he stealeth in the dark,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>On whose skirts the bitch slept; ere she could bark,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Attach’d her with straight grips; yet he call’d those</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Embracements of love; to love’s work he goes,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Where deeds move more than words; nor doth she show</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Nor much resist, nor needs he straiten so</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">His prey, for, were she loose, she would nor bark nor go.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="infinitati-sacrum-2-43">
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLIII</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>He hath engaged her; his, she wholly bides;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Who not her own, none others’ secrets hides.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>If to the flock he come, and Abel there,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>She feigns hoarse barkings, but she biteth not;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Her faith is quite, but not her love forgot.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>At last a trap, of which some everywhere</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Abel had placed, ends all his loss and fear,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By the wolf’s death; and now just time it was</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That a quick soul should give life to that mass</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Of blood in Abel’s bitch, and thither this did pass.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="infinitati-sacrum-2-44">
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLIV</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Some have their wives, their sisters some begot,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But in the lives of emperors you shall not</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Read of a lust, the which may equal this.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>This wolf begot himself, and finished</span>
						<br/>
						<span>What he began alive, when he was dead;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Son to himself, and father too, he is</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A riddling lust, for which schoolmen would miss</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A proper name. The whelp of both these lay</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In Abel’s tent, and with soft Moaba,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">His sister, being young, it used to sport and play.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="infinitati-sacrum-2-45">
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLV</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>He soon for her too harsh and churlish grew,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And Abel⁠—the dam dead⁠—would use this new</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For the field; being of two kinds thus made,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He, as his dam, from sheep drove wolves away,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And, as his sire, he made them his own prey.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Five years he lived, and cozen’d with his trade;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Then hopeless that his faults were hid, betray’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Himself by flight, and by all followed,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>From dogs, a wolf; from wolves, a dog he fled.</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And, like a spy to both sides false, he perished.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="infinitati-sacrum-2-46">
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLVI</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>It quicken’d next a toyful ape, and so</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Gamesome it was, that it might freely go</span>
						<br/>
						<span>From tent to tent, and with the children play.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>His organs now so like theirs he doth find,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That why he cannot laugh and speak his mind,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He wonders. Much with all, most he doth stay</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With Adam’s fifth daughter, Siphatecia;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Doth gaze on her, and, where she passeth, pass,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Gathers her fruits, and tumbles on the grass;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And wisest of that kind, the first true lover was.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="infinitati-sacrum-2-47">
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLVII</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>He was the first that more desired to have</span>
						<br/>
						<span>One than another; first that e’er did crave</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Love by mute signs, and had no power to speak;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>First that could make love faces, or could do</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The vaulter’s somersaults, or used to woo</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With hoiting gambols, his own bones to break,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To make his mistress merry, or to wreak</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Her anger on himself. Sins against kind</span>
						<br/>
						<span>They easily do, that can let feed their mind</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">With outward beauty; beauty they in boys and beasts do find.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="infinitati-sacrum-2-48">
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLVIII</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>By this misled, too low things men have proved,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And too high; beasts and angels have been loved.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>This ape, though else through-vain, in this was wise,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He reached at things too high, but open way</span>
						<br/>
						<span>There was, and he knew not she would say nay.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>His toys prevail not, likelier means he tries.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He gazeth on her face with tear-shot eyes,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And uplifts subtly with his russet paw</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Her kidskin apron without fear or awe</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Of nature; nature hath no gaol, though she hath law.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="infinitati-sacrum-2-49">
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLIX</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>First she was silly and knew not what he meant.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That virtue, by his touches chafed and spent,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Succeeds an itchy warmth, that melts her quite;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>She knew not first, nor cares not what he doth,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And willing half, and more, more than half wroth,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>She neither pulls nor pushes, but out-right</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Now cries and now repents; when Thelemite,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Her brother, entered, and a great stone threw</span>
						<br/>
						<span>After the ape, who, thus prevented, flew.</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">This house, thus batter’d down, the soul possess’d a new.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="infinitati-sacrum-2-50">
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">L</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>And whether by this change she lose or win,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>She comes out next where th’ ape would have gone in.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Adam and Eve had mingled bloods, and now,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Like chemic’s equal fires, her temperate womb</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Had stew’d and form’d it; and part did become</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A spongy liver, that did richly allow,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Like a free conduit on a high hill’s brow,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Life-keeping moisture unto every part;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Part hardened itself to a thicker heart,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Whose busy furnaces life’s spirits do impart.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="infinitati-sacrum-2-51">
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LI</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Another part became the well of sense,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The tender well-arm’d feeling brain, from whence</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Those sinewy strings, which do our bodies tie,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Are ravell’d out, and fast there by one end,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Did this soul limbs, these limbs a soul attend.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And now they join’d, keeping some quality</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of every past shape; she knew treachery,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Rapine, deceit, and lust, and ills enow</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To be a woman. Themech she is now,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Sister and wife to Caïn, Cain that first did plough.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="infinitati-sacrum-2-52">
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LII</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Whoe’er thou beest that read’st this sullen writ</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Which just so much courts thee, as thou dost it,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Let me arrest thy thoughts; wonder with me,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Why ploughing, building, ruling, and the rest,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or most of those arts, whence our lives are blest,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By cursed Caïn’s race invented be,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And blest Seth vex’d us with astronomy.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>There’s nothing simply good, nor ill alone;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of every quality Comparison</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">The only measure is, and judge, Opinion.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
			</section>
		</article>
	</body>
</html>
