<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Letters to Several Personages</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<article id="letters-to-several-personages" epub:type="part">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Letters to Several Personages</h2>
			<article id="the-storm" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<hgroup>
					<h3 epub:type="title">The Storm</h3>
					<p epub:type="subtitle">To <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Christopher Brooke, from the Island Voyage with the Earl of Essex</p>
				</hgroup>
				<p>
					<span>Thou which art I⁠—’tis nothing to be so⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou which art still thyself, by these shalt know</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Part of our passage; and a hand or eye</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By Hilliard drawn is worth a history</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By a worse painter made; and, without pride,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When by thy judgment they are dignified,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My lines are such. ’Tis the pre-eminence</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of friendship only to impute excellence.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>England, to whom we owe what we be and have,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sad that her sons did seek a foreign grave</span>
					<br/>
					<span>—For Fate’s or Fortune’s drifts none can soothsay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Honour and misery have one face, and way⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From out her pregnant entrails sigh’d a wind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which at th’ air’s middle marble room did find</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such strong resistance, that itself it threw</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Downward again; and so when it did view</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How in the port our fleet dear time did leese,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Withering like prisoners, which lie but for fees,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mildly it kiss’d our sails, and fresh and sweet</span>
					<br/>
					<span>—As to a stomach starved, whose insides meet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Meat comes⁠—it came; and swole our sails, when we</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So joy’d, as Sarah her swelling joy’d to see.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But ’twas but so kind as our countrymen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which bring friends one day’s way, and leave them then.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then like two mighty kings, which dwelling far</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Asunder, meet against a third to war,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The south and west winds join’d, and, as they blew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Waves like a rolling trench before them threw.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sooner than you read this line, did the gale,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like shot, not fear’d till felt, our sails assail;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And what at first was call’d a gust, the same</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hath now a storm’s, anon a tempest’s name.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Jonas, I pity thee, and curse those men</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who, when the storm raged most, did wake thee then.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sleep is pain’s easiest salve, and doth fulfil</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All offices of death, except to kill.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But when I waked, I saw that I saw not;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I, and the sun, which should teach me, had forgot</span>
					<br/>
					<span>East, west, day, night; and I could only say,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If th’ world had lasted, now it had been day.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thousands our noises were, yet we ’mongst all</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Could none by his right name, but thunder, call.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lightning was all our light, and it rain’d more</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than if the sun had drunk the sea before.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some coffin’d in their cabins lie, equally</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Grieved that they are not dead, and yet must die;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And as sin-burden’d souls from grave will creep</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At the last day, some forth their cabins peep,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And trembling ask, “What news?” and do hear so</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As jealous husbands, what they would not know.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some sitting on the hatches would seem there</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With hideous gazing to fear away fear.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then note they the ship’s sicknesses, the mast</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shaked with an ague, and the hold and waist</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With a salt dropsy clogg’d, and all our tacklings</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Snapping, like too-too-high-stretch’d treble strings.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And from our tatter’d sails rags drop down so,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As from one hang’d in chains a year ago.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Even our ordnance, placed for our defence,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Strives to break loose, and ’scape away from thence.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pumping hath tired our men, and what’s the gain?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Seas into seas thrown, we suck in again;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hearing hath deaf’d our sailors, and if they</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Knew how to hear, there’s none knows what to say.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Compared to these storms, death is but a qualm,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hell somewhat lightsome, the Bermudas calm.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Darkness, light’s eldest brother, his birthright</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Claims o’er the world, and to heaven hath chased light.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All things are one, and that one none can be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Since all forms uniform deformity</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Doth cover; so that we, except God say</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Another <i xml:lang="la">Fiat</i>, shall have no more day.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So violent, yet long, these furies be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That though thine absence starve me, I wish not thee.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="the-calm" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">The Calm</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Our storm is past, and that storm’s tyrannous rage</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A stupid calm, but nothing it, doth ’suage.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The fable is inverted, and far more</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A block afflicts, now, than a stork before.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Storms chafe, and soon wear out themselves, or us;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In calms, Heaven laughs to see us languish thus.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As steady as I could wish my thoughts were,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Smooth as thy mistress’ glass, or what shines there,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The sea is now, and, as these isles which we</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Seek, when we can move, our ships rooted be.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As water did in storms, now pitch runs out;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As lead, when a fired church becomes one spout.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all our beauty and our trim decays,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like courts removing, or like ended plays.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The fighting-place now seamen’s rags supply;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all the tackling is a frippery.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No use of lanthorns; and in one place lay</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Feathers and dust, to-day and yesterday.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Earth’s hollownesses, which the world’s lungs are,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Have no more wind than th’ upper vault of air.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We can nor lost friends nor sought foes recover,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But meteor-like, save that we move not, hover.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Only the calenture together draws</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dear friends, which meet dead in great fishes’ maws;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And on the hatches, as on altars, lies</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Each one, his own priest and own sacrifice.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who live, that miracle do multiply,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where walkers in hot ovens do not die.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If in despite of these we swim, that hath</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No more refreshing than a brimstone bath;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But from the sea into the ship we turn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like parboil’d wretches, on the coals to burn.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like Bajazet encaged, the shepherds’ scoff,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or like slack-sinew’d Samson, his hair off,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Languish our ships. Now as a myriad</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of ants durst th’ emperor’s loved snake invade,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The crawling gallies, sea-gulls, finny chips,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Might brave our pinnaces, now bed-rid ships.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whether a rotten state, and hope of gain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or to disuse me from the queasy pain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of being beloved and loving, or the thirst</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of honour or fair death, out-push’d me first,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I lose my end; for here, as well as I,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A desperate may live, and coward die.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stag, dog, and all which from or towards flies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is paid with life or prey, or doing dies.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fate grudges us all, and doth subtly lay</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A scourge, ’gainst which we all forget to pray.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He that at sea prays for more wind, as well</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Under the poles may beg cold, heat in hell.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What are we then? How little more, alas,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is man now, than, before he was, he was?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nothing for us, we are for nothing fit;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Chance, or ourselves, still disproportion it.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We have no power, no will, no sense; I lie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I should not then thus feel this misery.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="to-sir-henry-wotton-1" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<hgroup>
					<h3 epub:type="title">To Sir Henry Wotton</h3>
					<p hidden="hidden" epub:type="subtitle">Sir, More Than Kisses, Letters Mingle Souls</p>
				</hgroup>
				<p>
					<span>Sir, more than kisses, letters mingle souls,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For thus, friends absent speak. This ease controls</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The tediousness of my life; but for these</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I could ideate nothing which could please;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But I should wither in one day, and pass</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To a bottle of hay, that am a lock of grass.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Life is a voyage, and in our lives’ ways</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Countries, courts, towns are rocks, or remoras;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They break or stop all ships, yet our state’s such,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That though than pitch they stain worse, we must touch.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If in the furnace of the raging line,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or under th’ adverse icy pole thou pine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou know’st two temperate regions, girded in,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dwell there; but O, what refuge canst thou win</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Parch’d in the court, and in the country frozen?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall cities built of both extremes be chosen?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Can dung or garlic be perfume? Or can</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A scorpion or torpedo cure a man?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cities are worst of all three; of all three?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O knotty riddle! each is worst equally.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cities are sepulchres; they who dwell there</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Are carcases, as if none such there were.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And courts are theatres, where some men play</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Princes, some slaves, all to one end, of one clay.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The country is a desert, where the good,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gain’d, inhabits not, born, is not understood.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There men become beasts, and prone to all evils;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In cities blocks, and in a lewd court devils.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As in the first chaos, confusedly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Each element’s qualities were in th’ other three,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So pride, lust, covetise, being several</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To these three places, yet all are in all,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And mingled thus, their issue is incestuous.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Falsehood is denizen’d; virtue is barbarous.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let no man say there, “Virtue’s flinty wall</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall lock vice in me, I’ll do none, but know all.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Men are sponges, which, to pour out, receive;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who know false play, rather than lose, deceive.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For in best understandings sin began,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Angels sinn’d first, then devils, and then man.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Only perchance beasts sin not; wretched we</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Are beasts in all but white integrity.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I think if men, which in these places live,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Durst look in themselves, and themselves retrieve,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They would like strangers greet themselves, seeing then</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Utopian youth grown old Italian.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Be then thine own home, and in thyself dwell;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Inn anywhere; continuance maketh hell.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And seeing the snail, which everywhere doth roam,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Carrying his own house still, still is at home;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Follow⁠—for he is easy paced⁠—this snail,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Be thine own palace, or the world’s thy gaol.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in the world’s sea do not like cork sleep</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon the water’s face; nor in the deep</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sink like a lead without a line; but as</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fishes glide, leaving no print where they pass,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor making sound; so closely thy course go,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let men dispute, whether thou breathe or no.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Only in this be no Galenist⁠—to make</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Courts’ hot ambitions wholesome, do not take</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A dram of country’s dullness; do not add</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Correctives, but, as chemics, purge the bad.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But, sir, I advise not you, I rather do</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Say o’er those lessons, which I learn’d of you;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whom, free from Germany’s schisms, and lightness</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of France, and fair Italy’s faithlessness,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Having from these suck’d all they had of worth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And brought home that faith which you carried forth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I thoroughly love; but if myself I’ve won</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To know my rules, I have, and you have <strong>Donne</strong>.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="to-sir-henry-goodyere" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">To Sir Henry Goodyere</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Who makes the past a pattern for next year,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Turns no new leaf, but still the same things reads;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Seen things he sees again, heard things doth hear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And makes his life but like a pair of beads.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>A palace, when ’tis that which it should be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Leaves growing, and stands such, or else decays;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But he which dwells there is not so; for he</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Strives to urge upward, and his fortune raise.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So had your body her morning, hath her noon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And shall not better; her next change is night;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But her fair, larger guest, to whom sun and moon</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Are sparks, and short-lived, claims another right.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The noble soul by age grows lustier;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her appetite and her digestion mend.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We must not starve, nor hope to pamper her</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With women’s milk, and pap, unto the end.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Provide you manlier diet. You have seen</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All libraries, which are schools, camps, and courts;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But ask your garners if you have not been</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In harvest too indulgent to your sports.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Would you redeem it? then yourself transplant</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Awhile from hence. Perchance outlandish ground</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bears no more wit than ours; but yet more scant</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Are those diversions there, which here abound.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>To be a stranger hath that benefit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">We can beginnings, but not habits choke.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Go⁠—whither? hence. You get, if you forget;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">New faults, till they prescribe to us, are smoke.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Our soul, whose country’s heaven, and God her</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Father, Into this world, corruption’s sink, is sent;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet so much in her travel she doth gather,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That she returns home wiser than she went.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>It pays you well, if it teach you to spare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And make you ashamed to make your hawks’ praise yours,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which when herself she lessens in the air,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">You then first say, that high enough she towers.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>However, keep the lively taste you hold</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of God; love Him as now, but fear Him more;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in your afternoons think what you told</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And promised Him, at morning prayer before.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Let falsehood like a discord anger you,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Else be not froward. But why do I touch</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Things of which none is in your practice new?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And fables, or fruit-trenchers teach as much.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But thus I make you keep your promise, sir,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Riding I had you, though you still stay’d there;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in these thoughts, although you never stir,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">You came with me to Mitcham, and are here.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="to-mr-rowland-woodward-1" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<hgroup>
					<h3 epub:type="title">To <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Rowland Woodward</h3>
					<p hidden="hidden" epub:type="subtitle">Like One Who in Her Third Widowhood Doth Profess</p>
				</hgroup>
				<p>
					<span>Like one who in her third widowhood doth profess</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Herself a nun, tied to retiredness,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So affects my Muse, now, a chaste fallowness.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Since she to few, yet to too many hath shown,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How love-song weeds and satiric thorns are grown,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where seeds of better arts were early sown;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Though to use and love poetry, to me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Betroth’d to no one art, be no adultery;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Omissions of good, ill, as ill deeds be.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>For though to us it seem but light and thin,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet in those faithful scales, where God throws in</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Men’s works, vanity weighs as much as sin.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>If our souls have stain’d their first white, yet we</span>
					<br/>
					<span>May clothe them with faith, and dear honesty,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which God imputes as native purity.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>There is no virtue but religion.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wise, valiant, sober, just, are names which none</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Want, which want not vice-covering discretion.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Seek we then ourselves in ourselves; for as</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Men force the sun with much more force to pass,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By gathering his beams with a crystal glass,</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So we⁠—if we into ourselves will turn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Blowing our spark of virtue⁠—may out-burn</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The straw which doth about our hearts sojourn.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>You know physicians, when they would infuse</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into any oil the souls of simples, use</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Places, where they may lie still warm, to choose.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So works retiredness in us. To roam</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Giddily and be everywhere, but at home,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such freedom doth a banishment become.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>We are but farmers of ourselves, yet may,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If we can stock ourselves, and thrive, uplay</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Much, much dear treasure for the great rent day.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Manure thyself then, to thyself be improved;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with vain outward things be no more moved,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But to know that I love thee and would be loved.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="to-sir-henry-wotton-2" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<hgroup>
					<h3 epub:type="title">To Sir Henry Wotton</h3>
					<p hidden="hidden" epub:type="subtitle">Here’s No More News Than Virtue; I May as Well</p>
				</hgroup>
				<p>
					<span>Here’s no more news than virtue; I may as well</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tell you Calais, or Saint Michael’s tales, as tell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That vice doth here habitually dwell.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Yet as, to get stomachs, we walk up and down,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And toil to sweeten rest; so, may God frown,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If, but to loathe both, I haunt court or town.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>For, here, no one is from th’ extremity</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of vice by any other reason free,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But that the next to him still ’s worse than he.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>In this world’s warfare, they whom rugged Fate</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(God’s commissary) doth so throughly hate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As in the court’s squadron to marshal their state;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>If they stand arm’d with silly honesty,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With wishes, prayers, and neat integrity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like Indians ’gainst Spanish hosts they be.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Suspicious boldness to this place belongs,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to have as many ears as all have tongues;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tender to know, tough to acknowledge wrongs.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Believe me, sir, in my youth’s giddiest days,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When to be like the court was a play’s praise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Plays were not so like courts, as courts like plays.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then let us at these mimic antics jest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose deepest projects and egregious gests</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Are but dull morals of a game at chests.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But now ’tis incongruity to smile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Therefore I end; and bid farewell awhile;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“At court,”⁠—though “from court” were the better style.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="henrico-wottoni-in-hibernia-belligeranti" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Henrico Wottoni in Hibernia Belligeranti</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Went you to conquer? and have so much lost</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yourself, that what in you was best and most,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Respective friendship, should so quickly die?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In public gain my share is not such that I</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Would lose your love for Ireland: better cheap</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I pardon death (who though he do not reap</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet gleans he many of our friends away)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then that your waking mind should be a prey</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To lethargies. Let shot, and bogs, and skeins</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With bodies deal, as fate bids and restrains;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ere sicknesses attack, young death is best,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who pays before his death doth ’scape arrest.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let not your soul (at first with graces fill’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And since, and thorough crooked limbecs, still’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In many schools and courts, which quicken it,)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It self unto the Irish negligence submit.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I ask not laboured letters which should wear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Long papers out: nor letters which should fear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dishonest carriage: or a seers art:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor such as from the brain come, but the heart.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="to-the-countess-of-bedford-1" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<hgroup>
					<h3 epub:type="title">To the Countess of Bedford</h3>
					<p hidden="hidden" epub:type="subtitle">Reason Is Our Soul’s Left Hand, Faith Her Right</p>
				</hgroup>
				<p>
					<span class="i1"><b>Madam</b>⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Reason is our soul’s left hand, faith her right;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By these we reach divinity, that’s you;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their loves, who have the blessing of your light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Grew from their reason; mine from fair faith grew.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But as, although a squint left-handedness</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Be ungracious, yet we cannot want that hand;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So would I⁠—not to increase, but to express</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My faith⁠—as I believe, so understand.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Therefore I study you first in your saints,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Those friends whom your election glorifies;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then in your deeds, accesses and restraints,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And what you read, and what yourself devise.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But soon the reasons why you’re loved by all,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Grow infinite, and so pass reason’s reach;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then back again to implicit faith I fall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And rest on that the Catholic voice doth teach⁠—</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>That you are good; and not one heretic</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Denies it; if he did, yet you are so;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For rocks, which high to sense deep-rooted stick,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Waves wash, not undermine, nor overthrow.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>In everything there naturally grows</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A balsamum to keep it fresh and new,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If ’twere not injured by extrinsic blows;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Your birth and beauty are this balm in you.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But you, of learning, and religion,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And virtue, and such ingredients, have made</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A mithridate, whose operation</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Keeps off, or cures, what can be done or said.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Yet this is not your physic, but your food,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A diet fit for you; for you are here</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The first good angel, since the world’s frame stood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That ever did in woman’s shape appear.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Since you are then God’s masterpiece, and so</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His factor for our loves, do as you do;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Make your return home gracious, and bestow</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This life on that; so make one life of two.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For, so God help me, I would not miss you there,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For all the good which you can do me here.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="to-the-countess-of-bedford-2" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<hgroup>
					<h3 epub:type="title">To the Countess of Bedford</h3>
					<p hidden="hidden" epub:type="subtitle">You Have Refined Me, and to Worthiest Things</p>
				</hgroup>
				<p>
					<span class="i1"><b>Madam</b>⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>You have refined me, and to worthiest things⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Virtue, art, beauty, fortune. Now I see</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rareness or use, not nature, value brings;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And such, as they are circumstanced, they be.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Two ills can ne’er perplex us, sin to excuse;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But of two good things we may leave and choose.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Therefore at court⁠—which is not virtue’s clime,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where a transcendent height (as lowness me)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Makes her not be, or not show⁠—all my rhyme</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Your virtues challenge, which there rarest be;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For, as dark texts need notes, there some must be</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To usher Virtue, and say, “This is she.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So in the country’s beauty. To this place</span>
					<br/>
					<span>You are the season, Madam, you the day;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Tis but a grave of spices, till your face</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Exhale them, and a thick close bud display;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Widow’d and reclused else, her sweets she enshrines</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As China, when the sun at Brazil dines.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Out from your chariot morning breaks at night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And falsifies both computations; so,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Since a new world doth rise here from your light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We, your new creatures, by new reckonings go.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This shows that you from nature lothly stray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That suffer not an artificial day.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>In this you’ve made the court th’ antipodes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And will’d your delegate, the vulgar sun,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To do profane autumnal offices,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whilst here to you we sacrificers run;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And whether priests or organs, you we obey;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">We sound your influence, and your dictates say.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Yet to that deity which dwells in you,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Your virtuous soul, I now not sacrifice;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These are petitions and not hymns; they sue</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But that I may survey the edifice;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In all religions as much care hath been</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of temples’ frames and beauty, as rites within</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>As all which go to Rome do not thereby</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Esteem religions, and hold fast the best,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But serve discourse and curiosity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With that which doth religion but invest;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And shun th’ entangling labyrinths of schools,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And make it wit, to think the wiser fools;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So in this pilgrimage I would behold</span>
					<br/>
					<span>You as you’re Virtue’s temple, not as she;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What walls of tender crystal her enfold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What eyes, hands, bosom, her pure altars be;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And after this survey, oppose to all</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Babblers of chapels, you, th’ Escurial.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Yet not as consecrate, but merely as fair;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On these I cast a lay and country eye.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of past and future stories, which are rare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I find you all record and prophecy.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Purge but the book of Fate, that it admit</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">No sad nor guilty legends⁠—you are it.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>If good and lovely were not one, of both</span>
					<br/>
					<span>You were the transcript and original,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The elements, the parent, and the growth;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And every piece of you is both their all;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So entire are all your deeds, and you, that you</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Must do the same things still; you cannot two.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But these⁠—as nice thin school divinity</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Serves heresy to further or repress⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Taste of poetic rage, or flattery;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And need not, where all hearts one truth profess.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Oft from new proofs, and new phrase, new doubts grow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As strange attire aliens the men we know.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Leaving then busy praise and all appeal</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To higher courts, sense’s decree is true.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The mine, the magazine, the common-weal,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The story of beauty, in Twickenham is, and you.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who hath seen one, would both; as, who had been</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In Paradise, would seek the cherubin.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="to-sir-edward-herbert-now-lord-herbert-cherbury-being-at-the-siege-of-juliers" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">To Sir Edward Herbert, Now Lord Herbert Cherbury, Being at the Siege of Juliers</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Man is a lump, where all beasts kneaded be;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wisdom makes him an ark, where all agree.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The fool, in whom these beasts do live at jar,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is sport to others, and a theatre.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor ’scapes he so, but is himself their prey;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All which was man in him, is eat away;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And now his beasts on one another feed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet couple in anger, and new monsters breed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How happy ’s he, which hath due place assign’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To his beasts, and disafforested his mind;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Empaled himself to keep them out, not in;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Can sow, and dares trust, corn where they have been;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Can use his horse, goat, wolf, and every beast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And is not ass himself to all the rest.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Else, man not only is the herd of swine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But he’s those devils too, which did incline</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Them to a headlong rage, and made them worse;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For man can add weight to heaven’s heaviest curse.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As souls (they say) by our first touch take in</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The poisonous tincture of original sin,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So, to the punishments which God doth fling,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Our apprehension contributes the sting.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To us, as to His chickens, He doth cast</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hemlock, and we, as men, His hemlock taste.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We do infuse to what He meant for meat</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Corrosiveness, or intense cold or heat;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For God no such specific poison hath</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As kills, we know not how; His fiercest wrath</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hath no antipathy, but may be good</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At least for physic, if not for our food.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus man, that might be His pleasure, is His rod,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And is His devil, that might be his God.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Since then our business is to rectify</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nature, to what she was, we’re led awry</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By them, who man to us in little show,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Greater than due; no form we can bestow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On him, for man into himself can draw</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All; all his faith can swallow, or reason chaw.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All that is filled and all that which doth fill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All the round world, to man is but a pill;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In all it works not, but it is in all</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Poisonous, or purgative, or cordial;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For knowledge kindles calentures in some,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And is to others icy opium.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As brave as true is that profession then</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which you do use to make⁠—that you know man.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This makes it credible; you have dwelt upon</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All worthy books, and now are such an one.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Actions are authors, and of those in you</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Your friends find, every day, a mart of new.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="to-the-countess-of-bedford-3" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<hgroup>
					<h3 epub:type="title">To the Countess of Bedford</h3>
					<p hidden="hidden" epub:type="subtitle">To Have Written Then, When You Writ, Seem’d to Me</p>
				</hgroup>
				<p>
					<span>To have written then, when you writ, seem’d to me</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Worst of spiritual vices, simony;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And not to have written then seems little less</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Than worst of civil vices, thanklessness.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In this, my debt I seem’d loth to confess;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In that, I seem’d to shun beholdingness.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But ’tis not so; nothings, as I am, may</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Pay all they have, and yet have all to pay.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such borrow in their payments, and owe more</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By having leave to write so, than before.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet, since rich mines in barren grounds are shown,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">May I not yield (not gold but) coal or stone?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Temples were not demolish’d, though profane;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Here Peter Jove’s; there Paul hath Dian’s fane.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So whether my hymns you admit or choose,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In me you’ve hallowed a pagan muse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And denizen’d a stranger, who, mistaught</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By blamers of the times they marr’d, hath sought</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Virtues in corners, which now bravely do</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shine in the world’s best part, or all it⁠—you.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I have been told, that virtue in courtiers’ hearts</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Suffers an ostracism, and departs.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Profit, ease, fitness, plenty, bid it go;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But whither, only knowing you, I know.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Your, or you virtue, two vast uses serves;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It ransoms one sex, and one court preserves.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There’s nothing but your worth, which being true</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is known to any other, not to you.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And you can never know it; to admit</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">No knowledge of your worth, is some of it.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But since to you your praises discords be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Stoop others’ ills to meditate with me.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O! to confess we know not what we should,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is half excuse, we know not what we would.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lightness depresseth us, emptiness fills;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">We sweat and faint, yet still go down the hills</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As new philosophy arrests the sun,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And bids the passive earth about it run,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So we have dull’d our mind; it hath no ends;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Only the body’s busy, and pretends.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As dead low earth eclipses and controls</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The quick high moon, so doth the body souls.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In none but us are such mix’d engines found,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As hands of double office; for the ground</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We till with them, and them to heaven we raise.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who prayerless labours, or, without this, prays,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Doth but one half, that’s none; He which said, “Plough</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And look not back,” to look up doth allow.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Good seed degenerates, and oft obeys</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The soil’s disease, and into cockle strays.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let the mind’s thoughts be but transplanted so</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into the body, and bastardly they grow.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What hate could hurt our bodies like our love?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">We, but no foreign tyrants, could remove</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These not engraved, but inborn dignities,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Caskets of souls, temples and palaces;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For bodies shall from death redeemed be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Souls but preserved, born naturally free.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As men to our prisons now, souls to us are sent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which learn vice there, and come in innocent.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>First seeds of every creature are in us;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whate’er the world hath bad, or precious,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Man’s body can produce; hence hath it been</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That stones, worms, frogs, and snakes in man are seen.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But whoe’er saw, though nature can work so,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That pearl, or gold, or corn in man did grow?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We’ve added to the world Virginia, and sent</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Two new stars lately to the firmament.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Why grudge we us (not heaven) the dignity</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To increase with ours those fair souls’ company?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But I must end this letter; though it do</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Stand on two truths, neither is true to you.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Virtue has some perverseness, for she will</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Neither believe her good, nor others’ ill.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Even in you, virtue’s best paradise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Virtue hath some, but wise degrees of vice.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Too many virtues, or too much of one,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Begets in you unjust suspicion;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And ignorance of vice makes virtue less,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Quenching compassion of our wretchedness.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But these are riddles; some aspersion</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of vice becomes well some complexion.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Statesmen purge vice with vice, and may corrode</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The bad with bad, a spider with a toad.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For so, ill thralls not them, but they tame ill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And make her do much good against her will.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But in your commonwealth or world in you,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Vice hath no office or good work to do.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Take then no vicious purge, but be content</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With cordial virtue, your known nourishment.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="to-the-countess-of-bedford-on-new-years-day" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">To the Countess of Bedford, on New Year’s Day</h3>
				<p>
					<span>This twilight of two years, not past, nor next,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some emblem is of me, or I of this;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who⁠—meteor-like, of stuff and form perplex’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose what and where in disputation is⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If I should call me anything, should miss.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>I sum the years, and me, and find me not</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Debtor to th’ old, nor creditor to th’ new.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That cannot say, “My thanks I have forgot,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor trust I this with hopes; and yet scarce true</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This bravery is, since these times show’d me you.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>In recompense I would show future times</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What you were, and teach them to urge towards such.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Verse embalms virtue; and tombs, or thrones, of rhymes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Preserve frail transitory fame, as much</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As spice doth bodies from corrupt airs’ touch.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Mine are short-lived; the tincture of your name</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Creates in them, but dissipates as fast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>New spirits; for strong agents with the same</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Force, that doth warm and cherish us, do waste;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Kept hot with strong extracts, no bodies last.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So, my verse, built of your just praise, might want</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Reason and likelihood, the firmest base;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And made of miracle, now faith is scant,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Will vanish soon, and so possess no place;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And you, and it, too much grace might disgrace.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>When all⁠—as truth commands assent⁠—confess</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All truth of you, yet they will doubt how I</span>
					<br/>
					<span>—One corn of one low ant-hill’s dust, and less⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Should name, know, or express a thing so high,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And⁠—not an inch⁠—measure infinity.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>I cannot tell them, nor myself, nor you,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But leave, lest truth be endanger’d by my praise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And turn to God, who knows I think this true,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And useth oft, when such a heart mis-says,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To make it good, for such a praiser prays.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He will best teach you, how you should lay out</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His stock of beauty, learning, favour, blood;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He will perplex security with doubt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And clear those doubts; hide from you, and show you good;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And so increase your appetite and food.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He will teach you, that good and bad have not</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">One latitude in cloisters, and in court;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Indifferent there the greatest space hath got;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some pity ’s not good there; some vain disport,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On this side sin, with that place may comport.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Yet He, as He bounds seas, will fix your hours,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which pleasure and delight may not ingress;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, though what none else lost be truliest yours,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He will make you, what you did not, possess,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By using others’ (not vice, but) weakness.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He will make you speak truths, and credibly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And make you doubt that others do not so;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He will provide you keys, and locks, to spy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And ’scape spies, to good ends, and He will show</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What you may not acknowledge, what not know.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>For your own conscience, He gives innocence,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But, for your fame, a discreet wariness;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And⁠—though to ’scape, than to revenge offence</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Be better⁠—He shows both, and to repress</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Joy, when your state swells, sadness, when ’tis less.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>From need of tears He will defend your soul,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or make a re-baptizing of one tear;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He cannot⁠—that ’s, He will not⁠—dis-enroll</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Your name; and when with active joy we hear</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This private gospel, then ’tis our New Year.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="to-the-countess-of-huntingdon" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<hgroup>
					<h3 epub:type="title">To the Countess of Huntingdon</h3>
					<p hidden="hidden" epub:type="subtitle">Man to God’s Image, Eve to Man’s Was Made</p>
				</hgroup>
				<p>
					<span><b>Madam</b>⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Man to God’s image, Eve to man’s was made,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor find we that God breathed a soul in her;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Canons will not Church functions you invade,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor laws to civil office you prefer.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Who vagrant transitory comets sees,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wonders because they’re rare; but a new star,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose motion with the firmament agrees,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is miracle; for there, no new things are.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>In woman so perchance mild innocence</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A seldom comet is; but active good</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A miracle, which reason ’scapes, and sense;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For art and nature this in them withstood.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>As such a star the Magi led to view</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The manger⁠—cradled infant, God below,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By virtue’s beams⁠—by fame derived from you⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">May apt souls⁠—and the worst may⁠—virtue know</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>If the world’s age and death be argued well</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By the sun’s fall, which now towards earth doth bend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then we might fear that virtue, since she fell</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So low as woman, should be near her end.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But she’s not stoop’d, but raised; exiled by men</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She fled to heaven, that’s heavenly things, that’s you;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She was in all men thinly scatter’d then,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But now a mass contracted in a few</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>She gilded us, but you are gold; and she</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Informed us, but transubstantiates you.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Soft dispositions, which ductile be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Elixirlike, she makes not clean, but new.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Though you a wife’s and mother’s name retain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">’Tis not as woman, for all are not so;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But virtue, having made you virtue, is fain</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To adhere in these names, her and you to show</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Else, being alike pure, we should neither see;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As, water being into air rarified,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Neither appear, till in one cloud they be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So, for our sakes, you do low names abide.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Taught by great constellations⁠—which being framed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of the most stars take low names, Crab and Bull,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When single planets by the gods are named⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">You covet not great names, of great things full.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So you, as woman, one doth comprehend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in the veil of kindred others see;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To some you are reveal’d, as in a friend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And as a virtuous prince far off to me.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>To whom, because from you all virtues flow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And ’tis not none, to dare contemplate you,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I, which do so, as your true subject owe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some tribute for that; so these lines are due.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>If you can think these flatteries, they are,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For then your judgment is below my praise.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If they were so, oft, flatteries work as far</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As counsels, and as far th’ endeavour raise.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So my ill, reaching you, might there grow good,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But I remain a poison’d fountain still;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And not your beauty, virtue, knowledge, blood</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Are more above all flattery, than my will.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And if I flatter any, ’tis not you,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But my own judgment, who did long ago</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pronounce, that all these praises should be true,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And virtue should your beauty and birth outgrow.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Now that my prophecies are all fulfill’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Rather than God should not be honour’d too,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all these gifts confessed, which He instill’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yourself were bound to say that which I do.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So I but your Recorder am in this,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or mouth, and Speaker of the universe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A ministerial notary, for ’tis</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Not I, but you and fame, that make this verse.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>I was your prophet in your younger days,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And now your chaplain, God in you to praise.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="to-mr-thomas-woodward-1" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<hgroup>
					<h3 epub:type="title">To <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Thomas Woodward</h3>
					<p hidden="hidden" epub:type="subtitle">All Hail, Sweet Poet, More Full of More Strong Fire</p>
				</hgroup>
				<p>
					<span>All hail, sweet poet, more full of more strong fire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Than hath or shall enkindle my dull spirit;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I loved what nature gave thee, but thy merit</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of wit and art I love not, but admire.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who have before or shall write after thee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their works, though toughly laboured, will be</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like infancy or age to man’s firm stay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or early and late twilights to mid-day.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Men say, and truly, that they better be</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which be envied than pitied; therefore I,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Because I wish thee best, do thee envy;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O, wouldst thou, by like reason, pity me.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But care not for me; I, that ever was</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In nature’s, and in fortune’s gifts, alas</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">—But for thy grace, got in the Muses’ school⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A monster and a beggar, am a fool.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Oh, how I grieve that late-born modesty</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hath got such root in easy waxen hearts,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That men may not themselves their own good parts</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Extol, without suspect of surquedry.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For, but thyself, no subject can be found</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Worthy thy quill, nor any quill resound</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thy worth but thine; how good it were to see</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A poem in thy praise, and writ by thee.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Now if this song be too harsh for rhyme, yet, as</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The painters’ bad god made a good devil,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">’Twill be good prose, although the verse be evil.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If thou forget the rhyme as thou dost pass,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then write; then I may follow, and so be</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy debtor, thy echo, thy foil, thy zany;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I shall be thought⁠—if mine like thine I shape⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All the world’s lion, though I be thy ape.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="to-mr-thomas-woodward-2" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<hgroup>
					<h3 epub:type="title">To <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Thomas Woodward</h3>
					<p hidden="hidden" epub:type="subtitle">Haste Thee, Harsh Verse, as Fast as Thy Lame Measure</p>
				</hgroup>
				<p>
					<span>Haste thee, harsh verse, as fast as thy lame measure</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Will give thee leave, to him⁠—my pain and pleasure.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I’ve given thee, and yet thou art too weak,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Feet, and a reasoning soul, and tongue to speak.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tell him all questions, which men have defended,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Both of the place and pains of hell, are ended;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And ’tis decreed, our hell is but privation</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of him, at least in this earth’s habitation.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And ’tis where I am, where in every street</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Infections follow, overtake, and meet.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Live I or die, by you my love is sent;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And you’re my pawns, or else my testament.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="to-mr-thomas-woodward-3" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<hgroup>
					<h3 epub:type="title">To <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Thomas Woodward</h3>
					<p hidden="hidden" epub:type="subtitle">Regnant Again with th’ Old Twins, Hope and Fear</p>
				</hgroup>
				<p>
					<span>Pregnant again with th’ old twins, Hope and Fear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Oft have I asked for thee, both how and where</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou wert; and what my hopes of letters were;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>As in our streets sly beggars narrowly</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Watch motions of the giver Haste Thee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Harsh Verse, as Fast as Thy Lame Measure’s hand or eye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And evermore conceive some hope thereby.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And now thy alms is given, thy letter ’s read,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The body risen again, the which was dead,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thy poor starveling bountifully fed.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>After this banquet my soul doth say grace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And praise thee for ’t, and zealously embrace</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy love, though I think thy love in this case</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To be as gluttons, which say ’midst their meat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They love that best of which they most do eat.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="to-mr-thomas-woodward-4" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<hgroup>
					<h3 epub:type="title">To <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Thomas Woodward</h3>
					<p hidden="hidden" epub:type="subtitle">At Once from Hence My Lines and I Depart</p>
				</hgroup>
				<p>
					<span>At once from hence my lines and I depart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I to my soft still walks, they to my heart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I to the nurse, they to the child of art.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Yet as a firm house, though the carpenter</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Perish, doth stand; as an ambassador</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lies safe, howe’er his king be in danger;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So, though I languish, press’d with melancholy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My verse, the strict map of my misery,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall live to see that, for whose want I die.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Therefore I envy them, and do repent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That from unhappy me, things happy are sent.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet as a picture, or bare sacrament,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Accept these lines, and if in them there be</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Merit of love, bestow that love on me.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="to-mr-rowland-woodward-2" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<hgroup>
					<h3 epub:type="title">To <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Rowland Woodward</h3>
					<p hidden="hidden" epub:type="subtitle">Zealously My Muse Doth Salute All Thee</p>
				</hgroup>
				<p>
					<span>Zealously my Muse doth salute all thee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Enquiring of that mystic trinity</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whereof thou, and all to whom heavens do infuse</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like fire, are made; thy body, mind, and Muse.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dost thou recover sickness, or prevent?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or is thy Mind travailed with discontent?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or art thou parted from the world and me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In a good scorn of the world’s vanity?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or is thy devout Muse retired to sing</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon her tender elegiac string?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our minds part not, join then thy Muse with mine</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For mine is barren thus divorced from thine.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="to-mr-rowland-woodward-3" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<hgroup>
					<h3 epub:type="title">To <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Rowland Woodward</h3>
					<p hidden="hidden" epub:type="subtitle">Muse Not That by Thy Mind Thy Body Is Led</p>
				</hgroup>
				<p>
					<span>Muse not that by thy mind thy body is led:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For by thy mind, my mind’s distempered.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So thy care lives long, for I bearing part</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It eats not only thine, but my swoll’n heart.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And when it gives us intermission</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We take new hearts for it to feed upon.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But as a lay man’s genius doth control</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Body and mind; the Muse being the soul’s soul</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of poets, that methinks should ease our anguish,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Although our bodies wither and minds languish.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wright then, that my griefs which thine got may be</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cured by thy charming sovereign melody.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="to-mr-christopher-brooke" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<hgroup>
					<h3 epub:type="title">To <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Christopher Brooke</h3>
					<p hidden="hidden" epub:type="subtitle">Thy Friend, Whom Thy Deserts to Thee Enchain</p>
				</hgroup>
				<p>
					<span>Thy friend, whom thy deserts to thee enchain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Urged by this unexcusable occasion,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thee and the saint of his affection</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Leaving behind, doth of both wants complain.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And let the love I bear to both sustain</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">No blot nor maim by this division;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Strong is this love which ties our hearts in one,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And strong that love pursued with amorous pain.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But though besides thyself I leave behind</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Heaven’s liberal, and the thrice fair sun,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Going to where starved winter aye doth won,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet Love’s hot fires, which martyr my sad mind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Do send forth scalding sighs, which have the art</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To melt all ice, but that which walls her heart.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="to-mr-edward-guilpin" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">To <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Edward Guilpin</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Even as lame things thirst their perfection, so</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The slimy rhymes bred in our vale below,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bearing with them much of my love and heart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fly unto that Parnassus, where thou art.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There thou o’erseest London: here I have been</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By staying in London, too much overseen.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now pleasure’s dearth our city doth posses,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our theatres are filled with emptiness;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As lank and thin is every street and way</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As a woman delivered yesterday.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nothing whereat to laugh my spleen espies</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But bearbaitings or Law exercise.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Therefore I’ll leave it, and in the country strive</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pleasure, now fled from London, to retrieve.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Do thou so too: and fill not like a bee</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy thighs with honey, but as plenteously</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As Russian merchants, thyself’s whole vessel load,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And then at winter retail it here abroad.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bless us with Suffolk’s sweets; and as that is</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy garden, make thy hive and warehouse this.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="to-mr-rowland-woodward-4" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<hgroup>
					<h3 epub:type="title">To <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Rowland Woodward</h3>
					<p hidden="hidden" epub:type="subtitle">If, as Mine Is, Thy Life a Slumber Be</p>
				</hgroup>
				<p>
					<span>If, as mine is, thy life a slumber be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Seem, when thou read’st these lines, to dream of me.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Never did Morpheus nor his brother wear</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shapes so like those shapes, whom they would appear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As this my letter is like me, for it</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hath my name, words, hand, feet, heart, mind and wit.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It is my deed of gift of me to thee;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It is my will, myself the legacy.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So thy retirings I love, yea envy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Bred in thee by a wise melancholy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That I rejoice, that unto where thou art,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Though I stay here, I can thus send my heart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As kindly as any enamour’d patient</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His picture to his absent love hath sent.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>All news I think sooner reach thee than me;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Havens are heavens, and ships wing’d angels be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The which both gospel and stern threatenings bring.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Guiana’s harvest is nipp’d in the spring,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I fear; and with us, methinks, Fate deals so</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As with the Jews’ guide God did; He did show</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Him the rich land, but barr’d his entry in;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Our slowness is our punishment and sin.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Perchance, these Spanish businesses being done,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which, as the earth between the moon and sun,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Eclipse the light which Guiana would give,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Our discontinued hopes we shall retrieve.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But if⁠—as all th’ All must⁠—hopes smoke away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is not almighty virtue an India?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If men be worlds, there is in every one</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Something to answer in some proportion</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All the world’s riches; and in good men this,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Virtue, our form’s form and our soul’s soul, is.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="to-mr-rowland-woodward-5" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<hgroup>
					<h3 epub:type="title">To <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Rowland Woodward</h3>
					<p hidden="hidden" epub:type="subtitle">Kindly I Envy Thy Song’s Perfection</p>
				</hgroup>
				<p>
					<span>Kindly I envy thy song’s perfection</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Built of all th’ elements as our bodies are:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That Little of earth that is in it, is a fair</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Delicious garden where all sweets are sown.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In it is cherishing fire which dries in me</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Grief which did drown me: and half quenched by it</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Are satiric fires which urged me to have writ</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In scorn of all: for now I admire thee.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And as air doth fulfil the hollowness</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of rotten walls; so it mine emptiness,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where tossed and moved it did beget this sound</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which as a lame echo of thine doth rebound</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Oh, I was dead; but since thy song new life did give,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I recreated even by thy creature live.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="to-mr-samuel-brooke" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">To <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Samuel Brooke</h3>
				<p>
					<span>O Thou which to search out the secret parts</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of the India, or rather Paradise</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of knowledge, hast with courage and advice</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lately launch’d into the vast sea of arts;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Disdain not in thy constant travelling</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To do as other voyagers, and make</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some turns into less creeks, and wisely take</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fresh water at the Heliconian spring.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I sing not, siren-like, to tempt, for I</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Am harsh; nor as those schismatics with you,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which draw all wits of good hope to their crew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But seeing in you bright sparks of poetry,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I, though I brought no fuel, had desire</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With these articulate blasts to blow the fire.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="to-mr-i-l-1" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<hgroup>
					<h3 epub:type="title">To <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:personal-name z3998:initialism">I. L.</abbr></h3>
					<p hidden="hidden" epub:type="subtitle">Of That Short Roll of Friends Writ in My Heart</p>
				</hgroup>
				<p>
					<span>Of that short roll of friends writ in my heart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which with thy name begins, since their depart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whether in th’ English provinces they be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or drink of Po, Sequane, or Danuby,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There’s none that sometime greets us not, and yet</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Your Trent is Lethe; that past, us you forget.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>You do not duties of societies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If from th’ embrace of a loved wife you rise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>View your fat beasts, stretch’d barns, and labour’d fields,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Eat, play, ride, take all joys which all day yields,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And then again to your embracements go.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some hours on us your friends, and some bestow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon your Muse, else both we shall repent;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I that my love, she that her gifts on you are spent.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="to-mr-basil-brooke" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">To <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Basil Brooke</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Is not thy sacred hunger of science</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet satisfied? is not thy brain’s rich hive</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fulfill’d with honey, which thou dost derive</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From the arts’ spirits and their quintessence?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then wean thyself at last, and thee withdraw</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From Cambridge thy old nurse, and, as the rest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Here toughly chew, and sturdily digest</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Th’ immense vast volumes of our common law.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And begin soon, lest my grief grieve thee too,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which is, that that, which I should have begun</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In my youth’s morning, now late must be done;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I, as giddy travellers must do,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which stray or sleep all day, and having lost</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Light and strength, dark and tired must then ride post.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>If thou unto thy Muse be married,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Embrace her ever, ever multiply;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Be far from me that strange adultery</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To tempt thee, and procure her widowhood.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My Muse⁠—for I had one⁠—because I’m cold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Divorced herself, the cause being in me.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That I can take no new in bigamy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not my will only, but power doth withhold.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hence comes it, that these rhymes which never had</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Mother, want matter, and they only have</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A little form, the which their father gave;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They are profane, imperfect⁠—O, too bad</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To be counted children of poetry,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Except confirm’d and bishoped by thee.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="to-mr-i-l-2" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<hgroup>
					<h3 epub:type="title">To <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:personal-name z3998:initialism">I. L.</abbr></h3>
					<p hidden="hidden" epub:type="subtitle">Blest Are Your North Parts, for All This Long Time</p>
				</hgroup>
				<p>
					<span>Blest are your north parts, for all this long time</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My sun is with you; cold and dark ’s our clime;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Heaven’s sun, which stay’d so long from us this year,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Stay’d in your north, I think, for she was there;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And hither by kind nature drawn from thence,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Here rages, chafes, and threatens pestilence.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet I, as long as she from hence doth stay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Think this no south, no summer, nor no day.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With thee my kind and unkind heart is run;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There sacrifice it to that beauteous sun.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So may thy pastures with their flowery feasts,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As suddenly as lard, fat thy lean beasts;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So may thy woods oft poll’d, yet ever wear</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A green, and⁠—when thee list⁠—a golden hair;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So may all thy sheep bring forth twins; and so</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In chase and race may thy horse all out⁠—go;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So may thy love and courage ne’er be cold;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thy son ne’er ward; thy loved wife ne’er seem old.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But mayst thou wish great things, and them attain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As thou tell’st her, and none but her, my pain.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="to-sir-henry-wotton-at-his-going-ambassador-to-venice" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">To Sir Henry Wotton at His Going Ambassador to Venice</h3>
				<p>
					<span>After those reverend papers, whose soul is</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Our good and great king’s loved hand and fear’d name;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By which to you he derives much of his,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, how he may, makes you almost the same,</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>A taper of his torch, a copy writ</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From his original, and a fair beam</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of the same warm and dazzling sun, though it</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Must in another sphere his virtue stream;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>After those learned papers which your hand</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hath stored with notes of use and pleasures too,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From which rich treasury you may command</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fit matter whether you will write or do;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>After those loving papers where friends send,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With glad grief to your sea-ward steps, farewell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which thicken on you now, as prayers ascend</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To heaven in troops, at a good man’s passing-bell;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Admit this honest paper, and allow</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It such an audience as yourself would ask;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What you must say at Venice, this means now,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And hath for nature, what you have for task.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>To swear much love, not to be changed before</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Honour, alone will to your fortune fit;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor shall I then honour your fortune, more</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Than I have done your honour, wanting it.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But ’tis an easier load, though both oppress,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To want, than govern greatness, for we are</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In that, our own and only business,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In this, we must for others’ vices care.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>’Tis therefore well your spirits now are placed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In their last furnace, in activity;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which fits them⁠—schools and courts and wars o’erpast⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To touch and test in any best degree.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>For me if there be such a thing as I⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fortune⁠—if there be such a thing as she⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Spies that I bear so well her tyranny,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That she thinks nothing else so fit for me.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But, though she part us, to hear my oft prayers</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For your increase, God is as near me here;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to send you what I shall beg, His stairs</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In length and ease are alike everywhere.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="to-mrs-magdalen-herbert" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">To <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Magdalen Herbert</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Mad paper, stay, and grudge not here to burn</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With all those sons whom my brain did create;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At least lie hid with me, till thou return</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To rags again, which is thy native state.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>What though thou have enough unworthiness</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To come unto great place as others do;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That’s much⁠—emboldens, pulls, thrusts, I confess;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But ’tis not all; thou shouldst be wicked too.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And that thou canst not learn, or not of me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet thou wilt go; go, since thou goest to her,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who lacks but faults to be a prince, for she</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Truth, whom they dare not pardon, dares prefer.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But when thou comest to that perplexing eye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which equally claims love and reverence,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou wilt not long dispute it, thou wilt die;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, having little now, have then no sense.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Yet when her warm redeeming hand⁠—which is</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A miracle, and made such to work more⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Doth touch thee, sapless leaf, thou grow’st by this</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her creature, glorified more than before.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then as a mother which delights to hear</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her early child misspeak half-uttered words,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or because majesty doth never fear</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ill or bold speech, she audience affords.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And then, cold speechless wretch, thou diest again,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And wisely; what discourse is left for thee?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From speech of ill, and her, thou must abstain;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And is there any good which is not she?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Yet may’st thou praise her servants, though not her;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And wit, and virtue, and honour her attend;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And since they’re but her clothes, thou shalt not err,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If thou her shape, and beauty, and grace commend.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Who knows thy destiny? when thou hast done,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Perchance her cabinet may harbour thee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whither all noble ambitious wits do run,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A nest almost as full of good as she.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>When thou art there, if any, whom we know,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Were saved before, and did that heaven partake;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When she revolves his papers, mark what show</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of favour, she, alone, to them doth make.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Mark if, to get them, she o’erskip the rest;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Mark if she read them twice, or kiss the name;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mark if she do the same that they protest;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Mark if she mark whether her woman came.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Mark if slight things be objected, and o’erblown;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Mark if her oaths against him be not still</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Reserved, and that she grieves she’s not her own,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And chides the doctrine that denies freewill.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>I bid thee not do this to be my spy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor to make myself her familiar;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But so much I do love her choice, that I</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Would fain love him that shall be loved of her.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="to-the-countess-of-bedford-4" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<hgroup>
					<h3 epub:type="title">To the Countess of Bedford</h3>
					<p hidden="hidden" epub:type="subtitle">Honour Is So Sublime Perfection</p>
				</hgroup>
				<p>
					<span>Honour is so sublime perfection,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And so refined, that when God was alone</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And creatureless at first, Himself had none.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But as of th’ elements, these which we tread,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Produce all things with which we’re joyed or fed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And those are barren both above our head;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So from low persons doth all honour flow;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Kings, whom they would have honour’d, to us show,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And but direct our honour, not bestow.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>For when from herbs the pure part must be won</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From gross, by ’stilling, this is better done</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By despised dung, than by the fire of sun.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Care not then, madam, how low your praises lie;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In labourers’ ballads oft more piety</span>
					<br/>
					<span>God finds, than in <i xml:lang="la">Te Deum’s</i> melody;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And ordnance, raised on towers, so many mile</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Send not their voice, nor last so long a while,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As fires from the earth’s low vaults in Sicil isle.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Should I say I lived darker than were true,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Your radiation can all clouds subdue;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But One, ’tis best light to contemplate you;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>You, for whose body God made better clay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or took souls’ stuff, such as shall late decay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or such as needs small change at the last day.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>This, as an amber drop enwraps a bee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Covering discovers your quick soul, that we</span>
					<br/>
					<span>May in your through-shine front our hearts’ thoughts see.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>You teach⁠—though we learn not⁠—a thing unknown</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To our late times, the use of specular stone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through which all things within without were shown.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Of such were temples; so, and such you are;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Being and seeming is your equal care;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And virtue’s whole sum is but “Know” and “Dare.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But as our souls of growth and souls of sense</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Have birthright of our reason’s soul, yet hence</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They fly not from that, nor seek precedence,</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Nature’s first lesson; so discretion</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Must not grudge zeal a place, nor yet keep none,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not banish itself, nor religion.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Discretion is a wise man’s soul, and so</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Religion is a Christian’s, and you know</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How these are one; her “Yea” is not her “No.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Nor may we hope to solder still and knit</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These two, and dare to break them; nor must wit</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Be colleague to religion, but be it.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>In those poor types of God, round circles, so</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Religion’s types the pieceless centres flow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And are in all the lines which all ways go.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>If either ever wrought in you alone</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or principally, then religion</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wrought your ends, and your ways discretion.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Go thither still; go the same way you went;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whoso would change, do covet or repent;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Neither can reach you, great and innocent.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="to-the-countess-of-bedford-5" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<header>
					<hgroup>
						<h3 epub:type="title">To the Countess of Bedford</h3>
						<p hidden="hidden" epub:type="subtitle">Though I Be Dead and Buried, Yet I Have</p>
					</hgroup>
					<p epub:type="bridgehead">Begun in France, but never perfected.</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Though I be dead and buried, yet I have</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">—Living in you⁠—court enough in my grave.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As oft as there I think myself to be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So many resurrections waken me.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That thankfulness, your favours have begot</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In me, embalms me, that I do not rot.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This season, as ’tis Easter, as ’tis spring,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Must both to growth and to confession bring</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My thoughts, disposed unto your influence; so</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">These verses bud, so these confessions grow.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>First I confess I have to others lent</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Your stock, and over⁠—prodigally spent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Your treasure, for since I had never known</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Virtue or beauty, but as they are grown</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In you, I should not think or say they shine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">—So as I have⁠—in any other mine.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Next I confess this my confession,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For ’tis some fault this much to touch upon</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Your praise to you, where half rights seem too much,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And make your mind’s sincere complexion blush.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Next I confess my impenitence, for I</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Can scarce repent my first fault, since thereby</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Remote low spirits, which shall ne’er read you,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>May in less lessons find enough to do,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By studying copies, not originals.</span>
				</p>
				<footer>
					<p>
						<i xml:lang="la">Desunt Caetera.</i>
					</p>
				</footer>
			</article>
			<article id="a-letter-to-the-lady-carey-and-mistress-essex-rich-from-amiens" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">A Letter to the Lady Carey, and Mistress Essex Rich, from Amiens</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i1"><b>Madame</b>⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Here, where by all all saints invoked are,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Twere too much schism to be singular,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And ’gainst a practice general to war.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Yet turning to saints, should my humility</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To other saints than you directed be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That were to make my schism, heresy.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Nor would I be a convertite so cold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As not to tell it; if this be too bold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pardons are in this market cheaply sold,</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Where, because faith is in too low degree,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I thought it some apostleship in me</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To speak things which by faith alone I see:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>That is, of you, who are a firmament</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of virtues, where no one is grown, or spent;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They’re your materials, not your ornament.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Others, whom we call virtuous, are not so</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In their whole substance, but their virtues grow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But in their humours, and at seasons show.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>For when through tasteless flat humidity</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In dough-baked men some harmlessness we see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Tis but his phlegm that’s virtuous, and not he.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So is the blood sometimes; whoever ran</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To danger unimportuned, he was then</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No better than a sanguine virtuous man.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So cloistral men, who, in pretence of fear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All contributions to this life forbear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Have virtue in melancholy, and only there.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Spiritual choleric critics, which in all</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Religions find faults, and forgive no fall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Have through their zeal virtue but in their gall.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>We’re thus but parcel-gilt; to gold we’re grown</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When virtue is our soul’s complexion;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who knows his virtue’s name or place, hath none.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Virtue’s but aguish, when ’tis several,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By occasion waked, and circumstantial;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>True virtue’s soul, always in all deeds all.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>This virtue, thinking to give dignity</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To your soul, found there no infirmity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For your soul was as good virtue as she.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>She therefore wrought upon that part of you</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which is scarce less than soul, as she could do;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And so hath made your beauty, virtue too.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Hence comes it that your beauty wounds not hearts,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As others, with profane and sensual darts;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But as an influence, virtuous thoughts imparts.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But if such friends by th’ honour of your sight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Grow capable of this so great a light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As to partake your virtues and their might;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>What must I think that influence must do,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where it finds sympathy and matter too,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Virtue, and beauty of the same stuff, as you?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Which is, your noble worthy sister; she</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of whom, if what in this my ecstasy</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And revelation of you both I see,</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>I should write here, as in short galleries</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The master at the end large glasses ties,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So to present the room twice to our eyes,</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So I should give this letter length, and say</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That which I said of you; there is no way</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From either, but by th’ other, not to stray.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>May therefore this be enough to testify</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My true devotion, free from flattery;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He that believes himself, doth never lie.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="to-the-countess-of-salisbury-august-1614" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">To the Countess of Salisbury, August 1614</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Fair, great, and good, since seeing you we see</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What heaven can do, what any earth can be;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Since now your beauty shines; now, when the sun,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Grown stale, is to so low a value run,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That his dishevell’d beams, and scatter’d fires</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Serve but for ladies’ periwigs and tires</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In lovers’ sonnets, you come to repair</span>
					<br/>
					<span>God’s book of creatures, teaching what is fair;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Since now, when all is wither’d, shrunk, and dried,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All virtues ebb’d out to a dead, low tide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All the world’s frame being crumbled into sand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where every man thinks by himself to stand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Integrity, friendship, and confidence,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cements of greatness, being vapour’d hence,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And narrow man being fill’d with little shares,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Court, city, church are all shops of smallwares;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All having blown to sparks their noble fire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And drawn their sound gold ingot into wire;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All trying by a love of littleness</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To make abridgments, and to draw to less</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Even that nothing which at first we were;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Since in these times your greatness doth appear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And that we learn by it, that man, to get</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Towards Him that’s infinite, must first be great:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Since in an age so ill, as none is fit</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So much as to accuse, much less mend it</span>
					<br/>
					<span>—For who can judge, or witness of those times,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where all alike are guilty of the crimes?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where he that would be good, is thought by all</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A monster, or at best fantastical⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Since now you durst be good, and that I do</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Discern by daring to contemplate you,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That there may be degrees of fair, great, good,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through your light, largeness, virtue, understood;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If in this sacrifice of mine be shown</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Any small spark of these, call it your own</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And if things like these have been said by me</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of others, call not that idolatry;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For had God made man first, and man had seen</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The third day’s fruits and flowers, and various green,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He might have said the best that he could say</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of those fair creatures which were made that day;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And when next day he had admired the birth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of sun, moon, stars, fairer than late-prais’d earth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He might have said the best that he could say,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And not be chid for praising yesterday;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So though some things are not together true,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As, that another’s worthiest, and, that you;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet, to say so, doth not condemn a man,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If, when he spoke them, they were both true then.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How fair a proof of this in our soul grows;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We first have souls of growth and sense; and those,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When our last soul, our soul immortal, came,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Were swallow’d into it, and have no name.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor doth he injure those souls, which doth cast</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The power and praise of both them on the last;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No more do I wrong any, if I adore</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The same things now which I adored before,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The subject changed, and measure; the same thing</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In a low constable, and in the king</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I reverence, his power to work on me</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So did I humbly reverence each degree</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of fair, great, good, but more, now I am come</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From having found their walks, to find their home.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And as I owe my first souls thanks, that they</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For my last soul did fit and mould my clay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So am I debtor unto them, whose worth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Enabled me to profit, and take forth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This new great lesson, thus to study you;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which none, not reading others first, could do.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor lack I light to read this book, though I</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In a dark cave, yea, in a grave do lie;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For as your fellow-angels, so you do</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Illustrate them who come to study you.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The first whom we in histories do find</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To have profess’d all arts, was one born blind;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He lack’d those eyes beasts have as well as we,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not those by which angels are seen and see.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So, though I’m born without those eyes to live,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which fortune, who hath none herself, doth give,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which are fit means to see bright courts and you,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet, may I see you thus, as now I do,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I shall by that all goodness have discern’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And though I burn my library, be learn’d.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="to-the-lady-bedford" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">To the Lady Bedford</h3>
				<p>
					<span>You that are she, and you that’s double she,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In her dead face half of yourself shall see.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She was the other part, for so they do</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which build them friendships, become one of two;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So two, that but themselves no third can fit</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">—Which were to be so, when they were not yet</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Twins, though their birth Cusco and Musco take⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As divers stars one constellation make,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pair’d like two eyes have equal motion, so</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Both but one means to see, one way to go.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had you died first, a carcase she had been,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And we your rich tomb in her face had seen;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She like the soul is gone, and you here stay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Not a live friend, but th’ other half of clay.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And since you act that part⁠—as men say, “Here</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lies such a prince,” when but one part is there,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And do all honour and devotion due</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto the whole⁠—so we all reverence you;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For such a friendship who would not adore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In you, who are all what both were before,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not all, as if some perished by this,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But so, as all in you contracted is.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As of this all, though many parts decay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The pure which elemented them shall stay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And though diffused, and spread in infinite,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shall re-collect, and in one All unite;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So, madam, as her soul to heaven is fled,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her flesh rests in the earth, as in the bed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her virtues do, as to their proper sphere,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Return to dwell with you, of whom they were.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As perfect motions are all circular,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So they to you, their sea, whence less streams are.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She was all spices, you all metals; so</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In you two we did both rich Indies know.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And as no fire nor rust can spend or waste</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">One dram of gold, but what was first shall last;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though it be forced in water, earth, salt, air,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Expansed in infinite, none will impair;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So to yourself you may additions take,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But nothing can you less, or changed make.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Seek not in seeking new to seem to doubt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That you can match her, or not be without;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But let some faithful book in her room be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet but of Judith no such book as she.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
		</article>
	</body>
</html>
