<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Satires</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<article id="satires" epub:type="part">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Satires</h2>
			<section id="satire-1" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="label">Satire</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</span>
				</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Away, thou changeling motley humourist,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Leave me, and in this standing wooden chest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Consorted with these few books, let me lie</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In prison, and here be coffin’d when I die.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Here are God’s conduits, grave divines, and here</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nature’s secretary, the philosopher,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And wily statesmen, which teach how to tie</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The sinews of a city’s mystic body;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Here gathering chroniclers, and by them stand</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Giddy fantastic poets of each land.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall I leave all this constant company,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And follow headlong, wild, uncertain thee?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>First, swear by thy best love, here, in earnest</span>
					<br/>
					<span>—If thou, which lovest all, canst love any best⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou wilt not leave me in the middle street,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though some more spruce companion thou dost meet;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not though a captain do come in thy way</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bright parcel-gilt, with forty dead men’s pay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not though a brisk perfumèd pert courtier</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Deign with a nod thy courtesy to answer;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor come a velvet justice with a long</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Great train of blue coats, twelve or fourteen strong,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wilt thou grin, or fawn on him, or prepare</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A speech to court his beauteous son and heir?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For better or worse take me, or leave me;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To take and leave me is adultery.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O monstrous, superstitious puritan,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of refined manners, yet ceremonial man,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That when thou meet’st one, with enquiring eyes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Doth search, and like a needy broker prize</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The silk and gold he wears, and to that rate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So high or low, dost raise thy formal hat;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That will consort none, until thou have known</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What lands he hath in hope, or of his own,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As though all thy companions should make thee</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Jointures, and marry thy dear company.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Why shouldst thou, that dost not only approve,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But in rank itchy lust, desire and love</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The nakedness and bareness to enjoy</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of thy plump muddy whore, or prostitute boy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hate virtue, though she be naked and bare?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At birth, and death, our bodies naked are;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, till our souls be unapparelled</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of bodies, they from bliss are banished.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Man’s first blest state was naked; when by sin</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He lost that, he was clothed but in beasts’ skin;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in this coarse attire, which I now wear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With God and with the Muses I confer.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But since thou, like a contrite penitent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Charitably warn’d of thy sins, dost repent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These vanities and giddinesses, lo!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I shut my chamber door; and come, let’s go.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But sooner may a cheap whore, who hath been</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Worn by as many several men in sin,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As are black feathers, or musk-coloured hose,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Name her child’s right true father ’mongst all those;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sooner may one guess who shall bear away</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Th’ infant of London, heir to an India;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And sooner may a gulling weather-spy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By drawing forth heaven’s scheme, tell certainly</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What fashion’d hats, or ruffs, or suits next year</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our subtle-witted antic youths will wear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than thou, when thou depart’st from me, can show</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whither, why, when, or with whom thou wouldst go.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But how shall I be pardon’d my offence</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That thus have sinn’d against my conscience?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now we are in the street; he first of all,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Improvidently proud, creeps to the wall;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And so imprison’d, and hemm’d in by me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sells for a little state high liberty.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet though he cannot skip forth now to greet</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Every fine, silken, painted fool we meet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He them to him with amorous smiles allures,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And grins, smacks, shrugs, and such an itch endures,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As ’prentices or school-boys, which do know</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of some gay sport abroad, yet dare not go.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And as fiddlers stop lowest, at highest sound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So to the most brave, stoops he nighest the ground.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But to a grave man he doth move no more</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than the wise politic horse would heretofore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or thou, O elephant, or ape, wilt do,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When any names the King of Spain to you.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now leaps he upright, jogs me, and cries, “Do you see</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yonder well-favoured youth?” “Which?” “O, ’tis he</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That dances so divinely.” “O,” said I,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Stand still, must you dance here for company?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He droop’d, we went, till one⁠—which did excel</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Th’ Indians in drinking his tobacco well⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Met us; they talk’d; I whisper’d, “Let us go,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’T may be you smell him not; truly I do.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He hears not me, but, on the other side</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A many-colour’d peacock having spied,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Leaves him and me; I for my lost sheep stay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He follows, overtakes, goes on the way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Saying, “Him whom I last left, all repute</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For his device in handsoming a suit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To judge of lace, pink, panes, print, cut, and pleat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of all the court to have the best conceit.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Our dull comedians want him, let him go;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But O, God strengthen thee, why stopp’st thou so?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Why!” “Hath he travell’d long?” “No.” “But to me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which understand none, he doth seem to be</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Perfect French and Italian,” I replied,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“So is the pox.” He answer’d not, but spied</span>
					<br/>
					<span>More men of sort, of parts and qualities.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At last his love he in a window spies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And like light dew exhaled, he flings from me</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Violently ravish’d to his lechery.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Many were there; he could command no more;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He quarrell’d, fought, bled; and turn’d out of door</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Directly came to me, hanging the head,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And constantly a while must keep his bed.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="satire-2" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="label">Satire</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</span>
				</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Sir, though⁠—I thank God for it⁠—I do hate</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Perfectly all this town, yet there’s one state</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In all ill things so excellently best,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That hate toward them breeds pity towards the rest.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though poetry indeed be such a sin</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As I think that brings dearth and Spaniards in;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though like the pestilence and old-fashion’d love,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Riddlingly it catch men, and doth remove</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Never, till it be starved out, yet their state</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is poor, disarm’d, like Papists, not worth hate.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One⁠—like a wretch, which at bar judged as dead</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet prompts him, which stands next and cannot read,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And saves his life⁠—gives idiot actors means,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Starving himself, to live by his labour’d scenes.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As in some organ, puppets dance above</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And bellows pant below, which them do move,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One would move love by rhythms; but witchcraft’s charms</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bring not now their old fears, nor their old harms.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rams and slings now are silly battery;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pistolets are the best artillery.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And they who write to lords, rewards to get,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Are they not like singers at doors for meat?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And they who write, because all write, have still</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That excuse for writing, and for writing ill.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But he is worst, who (beggarly) doth chaw</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Others’ wits’ fruits, and in his ravenous maw</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rankly digested, doth those things out-spew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As his own things; and they’re his own, ’tis true;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For if one eat my meat, though it be known</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The meat was mine, th’ excrement is his own.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But these do me no harm, nor they which use</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To out-do ⸻, and out-usure Jews,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To out-drink the sea, to out-swear the ⸻,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who with sins of all kinds as familiar be</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As confessors, and for whose sinful sake</span>
					<br/>
					<span>School-men new tenements in hell must make,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose strange sins canonists could hardly tell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In which commandment’s large receipt they dwel.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But these punish themselves. The insolence</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Coscus only breeds my just offence,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whom time⁠—which rots all, and makes botches pox,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And plodding on, must make a calf an ox⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hath made a lawyer; which was, alas, of late</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But scarce a poet; jollier of this state,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than are new beneficed ministers, he throws,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like nets or lime-twigs, wheresoe’er he goes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His title of barrister on every wench,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And wooes in language of the pleas and bench.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“A motion, lady”⁠—speak Coscus⁠—“I have been</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In love e’er since <i xml:lang="la">tricesimo</i> of the Queen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Continual claims I’ve made, injunctions got,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To stay my rival’s suit, that he should not</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Proceed.”⁠—Spare me.⁠—“In Hilary term I went,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>You said, if I return’d next ’size in Lent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I should be in remitter of your grace;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In th’ interim my letters should take place</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of affidavits.” Words, words, which would tear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The tender labyrinth of a soft maid’s ear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>More, more than ten Sclavonians scolding, more</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than when winds in our ruin’d abbeys roar.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When sick with poetry, and possess’d with Muse</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou wast, and mad, I hoped; but men, which choose</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Law-practice for mere gain, bold soul[s] repute</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Worse than embrothell’d strumpets, prostitute.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now like an owl-like watchman, he must walk</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His hand still at a bill, now he must talk</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Idly, like prisoners, which whole months will swear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The only suretyship hath brought them there,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to every suitor lie in everything,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like a king’s favourite, or like a king;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like a wedge in a block, wring to the bar,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bearing like asses, and more shameless far</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than carted whores; lie to the grave judge, for</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bastardy ’bounds not in king’s titles, nor</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Simony and sodomy in churchmen’s lives,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As these things do in him; by these he thrives.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shortly, as the sea, he’ll compass all the land,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From Scots to Wight, from Mount to Dover strand;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And spying heirs melting with luxury,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Satan will not joy at their sins, as he.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For as a thrifty wench scrapes kitchen stuff,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And barrelling the droppings, and the snuff</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of wasting candles, which in thirty year</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(Relicly kept) perchance buys wedding-gear;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Piecemeal he gets lands, and spends as much time</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wringing each acre, as men pulling prime.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In parchment then, large as his fields, he draws</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Assurances, big as gloss’d civil laws,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So huge, that men, in our time’s forwardness,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Are Fathers of the church for writing less.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These he writes not, nor for these written pays;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Therefore spares no length⁠—as in those first days</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When Luther was profess’d, he did desire</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Short <i xml:lang="la">pater nosters</i>, saying as a friar</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Each day his beads, but having left those laws,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Adds to Christ’s prayer the Power and Glory clause.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But when he sells or changes land, he impairs</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His writings, and, unwatch’d, leaves out, <i xml:lang="fr">ses heires</i>,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As slyly as any commenter goes by</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hard words, or sense; or, in divinity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As controverters in vouch’d texts leave out</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shrewd words, which might against them clear the doubt.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where are those spread woods which clothed heretofore</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Those bought lands? not built, nor burnt within door.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where the old landlord’s troops, and alms? In halls</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Carthusian fasts, and fulsome Bacchanals</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Equally I hate. Mean’s blest; in rich men’s homes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I bid kill some beasts, but no hecatombs;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>None starve, none surfeit so. But oh, we allow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Good works, as good, but out of fashion now,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like old rich wardrobes. But my words none draws</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Within the vast reach of th’ huge statute’s jaws.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="satire-3" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="label">Satire</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</span>
				</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Kind pity chokes my spleen; brave scorn forbids</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Those tears to issue, which swell my eyelids.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I must not laugh, nor weep sins, and be wise.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Can railing, then, cure these worn maladies?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is not our mistress, fair Religion,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As worthy of all our souls’ devotion,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As virtue was in the first blinded age?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Are not heaven’s joys as valiant to assuage</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lusts, as earth’s honour was to them? Alas,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As we do them in means, shall they surpass</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Us in the end? and shall thy father’s spirit</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Meet blind philosophers in heaven, whose merit</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of strict life may be imputed faith, and hear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thee, whom he taught so easy ways, and near</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To follow, damn’d? Oh, if thou darest, fear this;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This fear great courage and high valour is.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Darest thou aid mutinous Dutch; and darest thou lay</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thee in ships, wooden sepulchres, a prey</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To leaders’ rage, to storms, to shot, to dearth?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Darest thou dive seas, and dungeons of the earth?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hast thou courageous fire to thaw the ice</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of frozen North discoveries; and thrice</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Colder than salamanders, like divine</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Children in th’ oven, fires of Spain and the line,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose countries limbecs to our bodies be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Canst thou for gain bear? and must every he</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which cries not, “Goddess!” to thy mistress, draw,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or eat thy poisonous words? courage of straw!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O desperate coward, wilt thou seem bold, and</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To thy foes, and his, who made thee to stand</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sentinel in his world’s garrison, thus yield,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And for forbid wars leave th’ appointed field?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Know thy foes; the foul devil, he whom thou</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Strivest to please, for hate, not love, would allow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thee fain his whole realm to be quit; and as</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The world’s all parts wither away and pass,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So the world’s self, thy other loved foe, is</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In her decrepit wane, and thou loving this,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dost love a wither’d and worn strumpet; last,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Flesh, itself’s death, and joys which flesh can taste,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou lovest; and thy fair goodly soul, which doth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Give this flesh power to taste joy, thou dost loathe.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Seek true religion, O where? Mirreus,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thinking her unhoused here and fled from us,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Seeks her at Rome, there, because he doth know</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That she was there a thousand years ago;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And loves the rags so, as we here obey</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The state-cloth where the prince sate yesterday.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Crants to such brave loves will not be enthrall’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But loves her only who at Geneva ’s call’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Religion, plain, simple, sullen, young,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Contemptuous yet unhandsome; as among</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lecherous humours, there is one that judges</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No wenches wholesome, but coarse country drudges.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Graius stays still at home here, and because</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some preachers, vile ambitious bawds, and laws,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Still new, like fashions, bid him think that she</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which dwells with us, is only perfect, he</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Embraceth her, whom his godfathers will</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tender to him, being tender; as wards still</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Take such wives as their guardians offer, or</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pay values. Careless Phrygius doth abhor</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All, because all cannot be good; as one,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Knowing some women whores, dares marry none.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gracchus loves all as one, and thinks that so</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As women do in divers countries go</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In divers habits, yet are still one kind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So doth, so is religion; and this blind⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ness too much light breeds. But unmovèd thou</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of force must one, and forced but one allow;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the right. Ask thy father which is she;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let him ask his. Though Truth and Falsehood be</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Near twins, yet Truth a little elder is.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Be busy to seek her; believe me this,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He’s not of none, nor worst, that seeks the best.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To adore, or scorn an image, or protest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>May all be bad. Doubt wisely; in strange way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To stand inquiring right, is not to stray;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To sleep, or run wrong, is. On a huge hill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cragged and steep, Truth stands, and he that will</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Reach her, about must and about must go,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And what th’ hill’s suddenness resists, win so.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet strive so, that before age, death’s twilight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy soul rest, for none can work in that night.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To will implies delay, therefore now do</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hard deeds, the body’s pains; hard knowledge to</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The mind’s endeavours reach; and mysteries</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Are like the sun, dazzling, yet plain to all eyes.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Keep the truth which thou hast found; men do not stand</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In so ill case, that God hath with His hand</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Signed kings blank-charters, to kill whom they hate;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor are they vicars, but hangmen to fate.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fool and wretch, wilt thou let thy soul be tied</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To man’s laws, by which she shall not be tried</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At the last day? or will it then boot thee</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To say a Philip or a Gregory,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A Harry or a Martin, taught thee this?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is not this excuse for mere contraries</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Equally strong? cannot both sides say so?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That thou mayst rightly obey power, her bounds know;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Those past, her nature and name is changed; to be</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then humble to her is idolatry.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As streams are, power is; those blest flowers, that dwell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At the rough stream’s calm head, thrive and do well,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But having left their roots, and themselves given</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To the stream’s tyrannous rage, alas, are driven</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through mills, rocks, and woods, and at last, almost</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Consumed in going, in the sea are lost.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So perish souls, which more choose men’s unjust</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Power from God claim’d, than God Himself to trust.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="satire-4" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="label">Satire</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</span>
				</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Well; I may now receive, and die. My sin</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Indeed is great, but yet I have been in</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A purgatory, such as fear’d hell is</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A recreation and scant map of this.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My mind, nor with pride’s itch, nor yet hath been</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Poison’d with love to see, or to be seen.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I had no suit there, nor new suit to show,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet went to court; but as Glaze which did go</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To mass in jest, catch’d, was fain to disburse</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The hundred marks, which is the statute’s curse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Before he ’scaped; so ’t pleased my destiny⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Guilty of my sin in going⁠—to think me</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As prone to all ill, and of good as forget⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Full, as proud, lustful, and as much in debt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As vain, as witless, and as false as they</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which dwell in court, for once going that way.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Therefore I suffer’d this; towards me did run</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A thing more strange, than on Nile’s slime the sun</span>
					<br/>
					<span>E’er bred, or all which into Noah’s ark came;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A thing which would have posed Adam to name;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stranger than seven antiquaries’ studies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than Afric’s monsters, Guiana’s rarities;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stranger than strangers; one, who for a Dane,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In the Danes’ massacre had sure been slain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If he had lived then; and without help dies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When next the ’prentices ’gainst strangers rise;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One, whom the watch, at noon, lets scarce go by;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One, to whom th’ examining justice sure would cry,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Sir, by your priesthood, tell me what you are.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His clothes were strange, though coarse, and black, though bare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sleeveless his jerkin was, and it had been</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Velvet, but ’twas now⁠—so much ground was seen⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Become tufftaffaty; and our children shall</span>
					<br/>
					<span>See it plain rash awhile, then nought at all.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The thing hath travell’d, and, faith, speaks all tongues,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And only knoweth what to all states belongs.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Made of th’ accents and best phrase of all these,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He speaks one language. If strange meats displease,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Art can deceive, or hunger force my taste,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But pedants’ motley tongue, soldiers’ bombast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mountebanks’ drug-tongue, nor the terms of law</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Are strong enough preparatives, to draw</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Me to bear this, yet I must be content</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With his tongue, in his tongue, called compliment;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In which he can win widows, and pay scores,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Make men speak treason, cozen subtlest whores,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Outflatter favourites, or outlie either</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Jovius, or Surius, or both together.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He names me, and comes to me; I whisper, “God!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How have I sinn’d, that Thy wrath’s furious rod,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This fellow, chooseth me?” He saith, “Sir,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I love your judgment; whom do you prefer,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For the best linguist?” And I sillily</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Said, that I thought Calepine’s dictionary.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Nay, but of men, most sweet Sir;” Beza then,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some Jesuits, and two reverend men</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of our two Academies I named. Here</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He stopped me, and said; were “Nay, your apostles were</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Good pretty linguists, and so Panurge was;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet a poor gentleman all these may pass</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By travel.” Then, as if he would have sold</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His tongue, he praised it, and such wonders told,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That I was fain to say, “If you’d lived, sir,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Time enough to have been interpreter</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To Babel’s bricklayers, sure the tower had stood.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He adds, “If of court life you knew the good,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>You would leave loneness.” I said, “Not alone</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My loneness is; but Spartan’s fashion,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To teach by painting drunkards, doth not taste</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now; Aretine’s pictures have made few chaste;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No more can princes’ courts⁠—though there be few</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Better pictures of vice⁠—teach me virtue.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He, like to a high-stretched lute-string, squeak’d, “O sir,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Tis sweet to talk of kings.” “At Westminster,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Said I, “the man that keeps the abbey tombs,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And for his price doth with whoever comes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of all our Harrys and our Edwards talk,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From king to king, and all their kin can walk.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Your ears shall hear nought but kings; your eyes meet</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Kings only; the way to it is King’s street.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He smack’d and cried, “He’s base, mechanic, coarse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So are all your Englishmen in their discourse.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Are not your Frenchmen neat? Mine, as you see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I have but one, sir, look⁠—he follows me.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Certes they’re neatly clothed. I of this mind am,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Your only wearing is your grogaram.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Not so, sir, I have more.” Under this pitch</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He would not fly; I chafed him. But as itch</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Scratched into smart, and as blunt iron ground</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into an edge, hurts worse; so I, fool, found</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Crossing hurt me. To fit my sullenness,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He to another key his style doth dress,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And asks, “What news?” I tell him of new plays.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He takes my hand, and as a still which stays</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A semi-breve, ’twixt each drop, he niggardly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As loth to enrich me, so tells many a lie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>More than ten Holinsheds, or Halls, or Stows,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of trivial household trash. He knows; he knows</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When the Queen frown’d, or smiled, and he knows what</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A subtle statesman may gather of that;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He knows who loves whom; and who by poison</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hastes to an office’s reversion;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He knows who hath sold his land, and now doth beg</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A licence, old iron, boots, shoes, and egg⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shells to transport; shortly boys shall not play</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At span-counter, or blow-point, but shall pay</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Toll to some courtier; and wiser than all us,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He knows what lady is not painted. Thus</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He with home meats cloys me. I belch, spew, spit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Look pale and sickly, like a patient, yet</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He thrusts on more; and as he’d undertook</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To say Gallo-Belgicus without book,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Speaks of all states and deeds that have been since</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Spaniards came, to the loss of Amiens.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like a big wife, at sight of loathèd meat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ready to travail, so I sigh and sweat</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To hear this Macaron talk. In vain; for yet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Either my humour, or his own to fit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He, like a privileged spy, whom nothing can</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Discredit, libels now ’gainst each great man.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He names a price for every office paid;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He saith, our wars thrive ill, because delay’d;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That offices are entail’d, and that there are</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Perpetuities of them, lasting as far</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As the last day; and that great officers</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Do with the pirates share, and Dunkirkers.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who wastes in meat, in clothes, in horse, he notes;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who loves whores, who boys, and who goats.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I more amazed than Circe’s prisoners, when</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They felt themselves turn beasts, felt myself then</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Becoming traitor, and methought I saw</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One of our giant statutes ope his jaw</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To suck me in, for hearing him I found</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That as burnt venom lechers do grow sound</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By giving others their sores, I might grow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Guilty, and he free; therefore I did show</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All signs of loathing; but since I am in,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I must pay mine and my forefathers’ sin</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To the last farthing. Therefore to my power</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Toughly and stubbornly I bear this cross; but th’ hour</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of mercy now was come; he tries to bring</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Me to pay a fine to ’scape his torturing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And says, “Sir, can you spare me”⁠—I said, “Willingly”;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Nay, sir, can you spare me a crown”? Thankfully I</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gave it, as ransom; but as fiddlers, still,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though they be paid to be gone, yet needs will</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thrust one more jig upon you; so did he</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With his long complimental thanks vex me.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But he is gone, thanks to his needy want,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the prerogative of my crown; scant</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His thanks were ended, when I⁠—which did see</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All the court fill’d with more strange things than he⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ran from thence with such, or more haste than one</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who fears more actions doth haste from prison.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At home, in wholesome solitariness,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My piteous soul began the wretchedness</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of suitors at court to mourn, and a trance</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like his, who dreamt he saw hell, did advance</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Itself o’er me; such men as he saw there,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I saw at court, and worse, and more. Low fear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Becomes the guilty, not th’ accuser; then</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall I, none’s slave, of high-born or raised men</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fear frowns? and, my mistress Truth, betray thee</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To huffing, braggart, puffed nobility?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No, no; thou which since yesterday hast been</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Almost about the whole world, hast thou seen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O sun, in all thy journey, vanity</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such as swells the bladder of our court? I</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Think he which made your waxen garden, and</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Transported it, from Italy, to stand</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With us at London, flouts our courtiers, for</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Just such gay painted things, which no sap nor</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Taste have in them, ours are; and natural</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some of the stocks are, their fruits bastard all.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Tis ten a-clock and past; all whom the mews,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Baloun, tennis, diet, or the stews</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had all the morning held, now the second</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Time made ready that day, in flocks are found</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In the presence, and aye⁠—God pardon me⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As fresh and sweet their apparels be, as be</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The fields they sold to buy them. “For a king</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Those hose are,” cry the flatterers; and bring</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Them next week to the theatre to sell. -</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wants reach all states. Meseems they do as well</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At stage as court; all are players; whoe’er looks</span>
					<br/>
					<span>—For themselves dare not go⁠—o’er Cheapside books</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall find their wardrobe’s inventory. Now,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The ladies come. As pirates, which do know</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That there came weak ships fraught with cochineal,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The men board them; and praise, as they think, well</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their beauties; they, the men’s wits; both are bought.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Why good wits ne’er wear scarlet gowns, I thought</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This cause; These men men’s wits for speeches buy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And women buy all reds which scarlets dye.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He called her beauty lime-twigs, her hair net;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She fears her drugs ill laid, her hair loose set.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Would not Heraclitus laugh to see Macrine</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From hat to shoe himself at door refine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As if the presence were a mosque; and lift</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His skirts and hose, and call his clothes to shrift,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Making them confess, not only mortal</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Great stains and holes in them, but venial</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Feathers and dust, wherewith they fornicate;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And then by Durer’s rules survey the state</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of his each limb, and with strings the odds tries</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of his neck to his leg, and waist to thighs?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So in immaculate clothes, and symmetry</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Perfect as circles, with such nicety</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As a young preacher at his first time goes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To preach, he enters, and a lady which owes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Him not so much as good will, he arrests,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And unto her protests, protests, protests,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So much as at Rome would serve to have thrown</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ten cardinals into th’ Inquisition;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And whispers “By Jesu!” so often, that a</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pursuivant would have ravish’d him away</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For saying of our Lady’s psalter. But ’tis fit</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That they each other plague; they merit it.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But here comes Glorius, that will plague them both,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who in the other extreme, only doth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Call a rough carelessness good fashion;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose cloak his spurs tear, or whom he spits on,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He cares not, he. His ill words do no harm</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To him, he rusheth in, as if “Arm, arm!”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He came to cry; and though his face be as ill</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As theirs, which in old hangings whip Christ, still</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He strives to look worse; he keeps all in awe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Jests like a licensed fool, commands like law.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tired now I leave this place, and, but pleased so</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As men from gaols to execution go,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Go through the great chamber⁠—why is it hung</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With the seven deadly sins?⁠—being among</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Those Ascaparts, men big enough to throw</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Charing Cross for a bar, men that do know</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No token of worth but “Queen’s man,” and fine</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Living, barrels of beef, flagons of wine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I shook like a spied spy. Preachers, which are</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Seas of wits and arts, you can, then dare</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Drown the sins of this place, for, for me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which am but a scant brook, it enough shall be</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To wash the stains away. Although I yet</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With Machabee’s modesty the known merit</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of my work lessen; yet some wise man shall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I hope, esteem my writs canonical.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="satire-5" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="label">Satire</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">V</span>
				</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Thou shalt not laugh in this leaf, Muse, nor they</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whom any pity warms. He which did lay</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rules to make courtiers⁠—he being understood</span>
					<br/>
					<span>May make good courtiers, but who courtiers good?⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Frees from the sting of jests all who in extreme</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Are wretched or wicked; of these two a theme</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Charity and liberty give me. What is he,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who officers’ rage and suitors’ misery</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Can write and jest? If all things be in all</span>
					<br/>
					<span>—As I think, since all which were, are, and shall</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Be, be made of the same elements,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Each thing each thing implies or represents⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then man is a world; in which officers</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Are the vast ravishing seas, and suitors</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Springs, now full, now shallow, now dry, which to</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That which drowns them run; these self reasons do</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Prove the world a man, in which officers</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Are the devouring stomach, and suitors</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Th’ excrements which they void. All men are dust;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How much worse are suitors, who to men’s lust</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Are made preys? O, worse than dust or worms’ meat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For they do eat you now, whose selves worms shall eat.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They are the mills which grind you, yet you are</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The wind which drives them; and a wasteful war</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is fought against you, and you fight it; they</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Adulterate law, and you prepare the way;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like wittols, th’ issue your own ruin is.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Greatest and fairest empress, know you this?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Alas, no more than Thames’ calm head doth know</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose meads her arms drown, or whose corn o’erflow.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>You, sir, whose righteousness she loves, whom I,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By having leave to serve, am most richly</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For service paid, authorized now begin</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To know and weed out this enormous sin.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O age of rusty iron!⁠—some better wit</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Call it some worse name, if aught equal it⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Th’ iron age that was, when justice was sold⁠—now</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Injustice is sold dearer⁠—did allow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All claimed fees and duties. Gamesters, anon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The money which you sweat and swear for is gone</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into other hands. So controverted lands</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Scape, like Angelica, the striver’s hands.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If law be in the judge’s heart, and he</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Have no heart to resist letter, or fee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where wilt thou appeal? power of the courts below</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Flows from the first main head, and these can throw</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thee, if they suck thee in, to misery,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To fetters, halters. But if the injury</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Steel thee to dare complain; alas, thou goest</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Against the stream, upwards, when thou art most</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Heavy and most faint; and in these labours they,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Gainst whom thou shouldst complain, will in thy way</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Become great seas, o’er which, when thou shalt be</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Forced to make golden bridges, thou shalt see</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That all thy gold was drown’d in them before.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All things follow their like; only who have, may have more.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Judges are gods; he who made and said them so,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Meant not men should be forced to them to go,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By means of angels. When supplications</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We send to God; to Dominations,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Powers, Cherubins, and all heaven’s courts, if we</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Should pay fees as here, daily bread would be</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Scarce to kings; so ’tis. Would it not anger</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A Stoic, a coward, yea a martyr,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To see a pursuivant come in, and call</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All his clothes copes, books primers, and all</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His plate chalices, and mis-take them away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And lack a fee for coming? Oh! ne’er may</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fair Law’s white reverend name be strumpeted,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To warrant thefts; she is established</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Recorder to Destiny on earth, and she</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Speaks Fate’s words, and but tells us who must be</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rich, who poor; who in chairs, who in gaols.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She is all fair, but yet hath foul long nails,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With which she scratcheth suitors; in bodies</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of men, so in law, nails are extremities.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So officers stretch to more than law can do,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As our nails reach what no else part comes to.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Why barest thou to yon officer? Fool! hath he</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Got those goods, for which erst men bared to thee?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fool! twice, thrice thou hast bought wrong, and now hungrily</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beg’st right, but that dole comes not till these die.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou hadst much, and laws Urim and Thummim try</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou wouldst for more; and for all hast paper</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Enough to clothe all the great Carrick’s pepper.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sell that, and by that thou much more shalt leese</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then Hammon if he sold his antiquities.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O wretch, that thy fortunes should moralize</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Esop’s fables, and make tales prophecies.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou art the swimming dog whom shadows cozened,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And divest, near drowning, for what vanished.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<article id="upon-mr-thomas-coryats-crudities" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Upon <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Thomas Coryat’s Crudities</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Oh, to what height will love of greatness drive</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy learned spirit, <i xml:lang="la">sesqui-superlative</i>?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Venice’ vast lake thou’st seen, and wouldst seek then</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some vaster thing, and found’st a courtesan.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That inland sea having discover’d well,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A cellar-gulf, where one might sail to hell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From Heidelberg, thou longed’st to see; and thou</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This book, greater than all, producest now.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Infinite work! which doth so far extend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That none can study it to any end.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Tis no one thing; it is not fruit nor root,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor poorly limited with head or foot.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If man be therefore man, because he can</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Reason and laugh, thy book doth half make man.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One-half being made, thy modesty was such,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That thou on th’ other half wouldst never touch.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When wilt thou be at full, great lunatic?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not till thou exceed the world? canst thou be like</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A prosperous nose-born wen, which sometimes grows</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To be far greater than the mother-nose?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Go then, and as to thee, when thou didst go,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Münster did towns, and Gesner authors show,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mount now to Gallo-Belgicus; appear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As deep a statesman, as a gazetteer.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Homely and familiarly, when thou comest back,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Talk of Will Conqueror, and Prester Jack.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Go, bashful man, lest here thou blush to look</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon the progress of thy glorious book,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To which both Indies sacrifices send.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The West sent gold, which thou didst freely spend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Meaning to see ’t no more, upon the press.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The East sends hither her deliciousness,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thy leaves must embrace what comes from thence,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The myrrh, the pepper, and the frankincense.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This magnifies thy leaves; but if they stoop</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To neighbour wares, when merchants do unhoop</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Voluminous barrels; if thy leaves do then</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Convey these wares in parcels unto men;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If for vast tons of currants and of figs,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of medicinal and aromatic twigs,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy leaves a better method do provide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Divide to pounds, and ounces subdivide;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If they stoop lower yet, and vent our wares,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Home-manufactures, to thick popular fairs;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If omni-pregnant there upon warm stalls</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They hatch all wares for which the buyer calls;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then thus thy leaves we justly may commend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That they all kind of matter comprehend.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus thou, by means which th’ ancients never took,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A Pandect makest, and universal book.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The bravest heroës, for public good,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Scattered in divers lands their limbs and blood;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Worst malefactors, to whom men are prize,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Do public good, cut in anatomies;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So will thy book in pieces for a lord,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which casts at Portescue’s, and all the board</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Provide whole books; each leaf enough will be</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For friends to pass time, and keep company.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Can all carouse up thee? no, thou must fit</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Measures and fill out for the half-pint wit.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some shall wrap pills, and save a friend’s life so;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some shall stop muskets, and so kill a foe.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou shalt not ease the critics of next age</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So much, as once their hunger to assuage;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor shall wit-pirates hope to find thee lie</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All in one bottom, in one library.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some leaves may paste strings there in other books,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And so one may, which on another looks,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pilfer, alas, a little wit from you;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But hardly much; and yet I think this true;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As Sibyl’s was, your book is mystical,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For every piece is as much worth as all.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Therefore mine impotency I confess;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The healths, which my brain bears, must be far less;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy giant wit o’erthrows me; I am gone;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And rather than read all, I would read none.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
		</article>
	</body>
</html>
