<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Songs and Sonnets</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<article id="songs-and-sonnets" epub:type="part">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Songs and Sonnets</h2>
			<article id="the-good-morrow" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">The Good-Morrow</h3>
				<p>
					<span>I wonder, by my troth, what thou and I</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Did, till we loved? were we not wean’d till then?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But suck’d on country pleasures, childishly?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or snorted we in the Seven Sleepers’ den?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Twas so; but this, all pleasures fancies be;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If ever any beauty I did see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which I desired, and got, ’twas but a dream of thee.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And now good-morrow to our waking souls,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which watch not one another out of fear;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For love all love of other sights controls,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And makes one little room an everywhere.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let sea-discoverers to new worlds have gone;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let maps to other, worlds on worlds have shown;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let us possess one world; each hath one, and is one.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>My face in thine eye, thine in mine appears,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And true plain hearts do in the faces rest;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where can we find two better hemispheres</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Without sharp north, without declining west?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whatever dies, was not mix’d equally;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If our two loves be one, or thou and I</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Love so alike that none can slacken, none can die.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="song-1" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<hgroup>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Song</h3>
					<p hidden="hidden" epub:type="subtitle">Go and Catch a Falling Star</p>
				</hgroup>
				<p>
					<span>Go and catch a falling star,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Get with child a mandrake root,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tell me where all past years are,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or who cleft the devil’s foot,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Teach me to hear mermaids singing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or to keep off envy’s stinging,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">And find</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">What wind</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Serves to advance an honest mind.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>If thou be’st born to strange sights,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Things invisible to see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ride ten thousand days and nights,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till age snow white hairs on thee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou, when thou return’st, wilt tell me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All strange wonders that befell thee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">And swear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">No where</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lives a woman true and fair.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>If thou find’st one, let me know;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Such a pilgrimage were sweet.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet do not, I would not go,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Though at next door we might meet.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though she were true when you met her,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And last till you write your letter,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">Yet she</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">Will be</span>
					<br/>
					<span>False, ere I come, to two or three.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="womans-constancy" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Woman’s Constancy</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Now thou hast loved me one whole day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To-morrow when thou leavest, what wilt thou say?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wilt thou then antedate some new-made vow?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i5">Or say that now</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We are not just those persons which we were?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or that oaths made in reverential fear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Love, and his wrath, any may forswear?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or, as true deaths true marriages untie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So lovers’ contracts, images of those,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bind but till sleep, death’s image, them unloose?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i5">Or, your own end to justify,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For having purposed change and falsehood, you</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Can have no way but falsehood to be true?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Vain lunatic, against these ’scapes I could</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i5">Dispute, and conquer, if I would;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i5">Which I abstain to do,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For by to-morrow I may think so too.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="the-undertaking" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">The Undertaking</h3>
				<p>
					<span>I have done one braver thing</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Than all the Worthies did;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And yet a braver thence doth spring,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which is, to keep that hid.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>It were but madness now to impart</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The skill of specular stone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When he, which can have learn’d the art</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To cut it, can find none.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So, if I now should utter this,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Others⁠—because no more</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such stuff to work upon, there is⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Would love but as before.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But he who loveliness within</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hath found, all outward loathes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For he who colour loves, and skin,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Loves but their oldest clothes.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>If, as I have, you also do</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Virtue in woman see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And dare love that, and say so too,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And forget the He and She;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And if this love, though placèd so,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From profane men you hide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which will no faith on this bestow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or, if they do, deride;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then you have done a braver thing</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Than all the Worthies did;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And a braver thence will spring,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which is, to keep that hid.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="the-sun-rising" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">The Sun Rising</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i2">Busy old fool, unruly Sun,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Why dost thou thus,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through windows, and through curtains, call on us?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Must to thy motions lovers’ seasons run?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Saucy pedantic wretch, go chide</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Late school-boys and sour prentices,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Go tell court - huntsmen that the king will ride,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Call country ants to harvest offices;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Love, all alike, no season knows nor clime,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor hours, days, months, which are the rags of time.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i2">Thy beams so reverend, and strong</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Why shouldst thou think?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I could eclipse and cloud them with a wink,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But that I would not lose her sight so long.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">If her eyes have not blinded thine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Look, and to-morrow late tell me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whether both th’ Indias of spice and mine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Be where thou left’st them, or lie here with me.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ask for those kings whom thou saw’st yesterday,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thou shalt hear, “All here in one bed lay.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i2">She’s all states, and all princes I;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Nothing else is;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Princes do but play us; compared to this,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All honour’s mimic, all wealth alchemy.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Thou, Sun, art half as happy as we,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">In that the world’s contracted thus;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thine age asks ease, and since thy duties be</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To warm the world, that’s done in warming us.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shine here to us, and thou art everywhere;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This bed thy centre is, these walls thy sphere.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="the-indifferent" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">The Indifferent</h3>
				<p>
					<span>I can love both fair and brown;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her whom abundance melts, and her whom want betrays;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her who loves loneness best, and her who masks and plays;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her whom the country form’d, and whom the town;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her who believes, and her who tries;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her who still weeps with spongy eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And her who is dry cork, and never cries.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I can love her, and her, and you, and you;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I can love any, so she be not true.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Will no other vice content you?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Will it not serve your turn to do as did your mothers?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or have you all old vices spent and now would find out others?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or doth a fear that men are true torment you?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O we are not, be not you so;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let me⁠—and do you⁠—twenty know;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rob me, but bind me not, and let me go.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Must I, who came to travel thorough you,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Grow your fix’d subject, because you are true?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Venus heard me sigh this song;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And by love’s sweetest part, variety, she swore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She heard not this till now; it should be so no more.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She went, examined, and return’d ere long,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And said, “Alas! some two or three</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Poor heretics in love there be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which think to stablish dangerous constancy.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But I have told them, ‘Since you will be true,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>You shall be true to them who’re false to you.’ ”</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="loves-usury" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Love’s Usury</h3>
				<p>
					<span>For every hour that thou wilt spare me now,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i5">I will allow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Usurious god of love, twenty to thee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When with my brown my grey hairs equal be.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till then, Love, let my body range, and let</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Me travel, sojourn, snatch, plot, have, forget,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Resume my last year’s relict; think that yet</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i5">We’d never met.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Let me think any rival’s letter mine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i5">And at next nine</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Keep midnight’s promise; mistake by the way</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The maid, and tell the lady of that delay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Only let me love none; no, not the sport</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From country grass to confitures of court,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or city’s <i xml:lang="fr">quelque-choses</i>; let not report</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i5">My mind transport.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>This bargain’s good; if when I’m old, I be</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i5">Inflamed by thee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If thine own honour, or my shame and pain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou covet most, at that age thou shalt gain.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Do thy will then; then subject and degree</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And fruit of love, Love, I submit to thee.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Spare me till then; I’ll bear it, though she be</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i5">One that love me.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="the-canonization" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">The Canonization</h3>
				<p>
					<span>For God’s sake hold your tongue, and let me love;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or chide my palsy, or my gout;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My five grey hairs, or ruin’d fortune flout;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With wealth your state, your mind with arts improve;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Take you a course, get you a place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Observe his Honour, or his Grace;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or the king’s real, or his stamp’d face</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Contemplate; what you will, approve,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So you will let me love.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Alas! alas! who’s injured by my love?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What merchant’s ships have my sighs drown’d?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who says my tears have overflow’d his ground?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When did my colds a forward spring remove?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">When did the heats which my veins fill</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Add one more to the plaguy bill?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Soldiers find wars, and lawyers find out still</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Litigious men, which quarrels move,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Though she and I do love.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Call’s what you will, we are made such by love;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Call her one, me another fly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">We’re tapers too, and at our own cost die,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And we in us find th’ eagle and the dove.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">The phoenix riddle hath more wit</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">By us; we two being one, are it;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So, to one neutral thing both sexes fit.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">We die and rise the same, and prove</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Mysterious by this love.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>We can die by it, if not live by love,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And if unfit for tomb or hearse</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Our legend be, it will be fit for verse;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And if no piece of chronicle we prove,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">We’ll build in sonnets pretty rooms;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">As well a well-wrought urn becomes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The greatest ashes, as half-acre tombs,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And by these hymns all shall approve</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Us canonized for love;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And thus invoke us, “You, whom reverend love</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Made one another’s hermitage;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">You, to whom love was peace, that now is rage;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who did the whole world’s soul contract, drove</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Into the glasses of your eyes;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">So made such mirrors, and such spies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That they did all to you epitomize⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Countries, towns, courts beg from above</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A pattern of your love.”</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="the-triple-fool" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">The Triple Fool</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">I am two fools, I know,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For loving, and for saying so</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">In whining poetry;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But where’s that wise man, that would not be I,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">If she would not deny?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then as th’ earth’s inward narrow crooked lanes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Do purge sea water’s fretful salt away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I thought, if I could draw my pains</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through rhyme’s vexation, I should them allay.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Grief brought to numbers cannot be so fierce,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For he tames it, that fetters it in verse.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">But when I have done so,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some man, his art and voice to show,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Doth set and sing my pain;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, by delighting many, frees again</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Grief, which verse did restrain.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To love and grief tribute of verse belongs,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But not of such as pleases when ’tis read.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Both are increasèd by such songs,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For both their triumphs so are published,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I, which was two fools, do so grow three.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who are a little wise, the best fools be.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="lovers-infiniteness" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Lovers’ Infiniteness</h3>
				<p>
					<span>If yet I have not all thy love,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dear, I shall never have it all;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I cannot breathe one other sigh, to move,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor can intreat one other tear to fall;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all my treasure, which should purchase thee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sighs, tears, and oaths, and letters I have spent;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet no more can be due to me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than at the bargain made was meant.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If then thy gift of love were partial,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That some to me, some should to others fall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Dear, I shall never have thee all.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Or if then thou gavest me all,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All was but all, which thou hadst then;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But if in thy heart since there be or shall</span>
					<br/>
					<span>New love created be by other men,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which have their stocks entire, and can in tears,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In sighs, in oaths, and letters, outbid me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This new love may beget new fears,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For this love was not vow’d by thee.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And yet it was, thy gift being general;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The ground, thy heart, is mine; what ever shall</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Grow there, dear, I should have it all.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Yet I would not have all yet.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He that hath all can have no more;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And since my love doth every day admit</span>
					<br/>
					<span>New growth, thou shouldst have new rewards in store;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou canst not every day give me thy heart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If thou canst give it, then thou never gavest it;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Love’s riddles are, that though thy heart depart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It stays at home, and thou with losing savest it;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But we will have a way more liberal,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than changing hearts, to join them; so we shall</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Be one, and one another’s all.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="song-2" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<hgroup>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Song</h3>
					<p hidden="hidden" epub:type="subtitle">Sweetest Love, I Do Not Go</p>
				</hgroup>
				<p>
					<span>Sweetest love, I do not go,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For weariness of thee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor in hope the world can show</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A fitter love for me;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">But since that I</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At the last must part, ’tis best,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus to use myself in jest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By feigned deaths to die.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Yesternight the sun went hence,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And yet is here to-day;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He hath no desire nor sense,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor half so short a way;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Then fear not me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But believe that I shall make</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Speedier journeys, since I take</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">More wings and spurs than he.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>O how feeble is man’s power,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That if good fortune fall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cannot add another hour,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor a lost hour recall;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">But come bad chance,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And we join to it our strength,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And we teach it art and length,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Itself o’er us to advance.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>When thou sigh’st, thou sigh’st not wind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But sigh’st my soul away;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When thou weep’st, unkindly kind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My life’s blood doth decay.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">It cannot be</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That thou lovest me as thou say’st,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If in thine my life thou waste,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That art the best of me.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Let not thy divining heart</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Forethink me any ill;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Destiny may take thy part,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And may thy fears fulfil.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">But think that we</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Are but turn’d aside to sleep.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They who one another keep</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Alive, ne’er parted be.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="the-legacy" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">The Legacy</h3>
				<p>
					<span>When last I died, and, dear, I die</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As often as from thee I go,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though it be but an hour ago</span>
					<br/>
					<span>—And lovers’ hours be full eternity⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I can remember yet, that I</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Something did say, and something did bestow;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though I be dead, which sent me, I might be</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mine own executor, and legacy.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I heard me say, “Tell her anon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That myself,” that is you, not I,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Did kill me,” and when I felt me die,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I bid me send my heart, when I was gone;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But I alas! could there find none;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When I had ripp’d, and search’d where hearts should lie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It kill’d me again, that I who still was true</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In life, in my last will should cozen you.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Yet I found something like a heart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But colours it, and corners had;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It was not good, it was not bad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It was entire to none, and few had part;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As good as could be made by art</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It seemed, and therefore for our loss be sad.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I meant to send that heart instead of mine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But O! no man could hold it, for ’twas thine.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="a-fever" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">A Fever</h3>
				<p>
					<span>O! Do not die, for I shall hate</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All women so, when thou art gone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That thee I shall not celebrate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When I remember thou wast one.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But yet thou canst not die, I know;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To leave this world behind, is death;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But when thou from this world wilt go,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The whole world vapours with thy breath.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Or if, when thou, the world’s soul, go’st,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It stay, ’tis but thy carcase then;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The fairest woman, but thy ghost,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But corrupt worms, the worthiest men.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>O wrangling schools, that search what fire</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shall burn this world, had none the wit</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unto this knowledge to aspire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That this her fever might be it?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And yet she cannot waste by this,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor long bear this torturing wrong,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For more corruption needful is,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To fuel such a fever long.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>These burning fits but meteors be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose matter in thee is soon spent;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy beauty, and all parts, which are thee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Are unchangeable firmament.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Yet ’twas of my mind, seizing thee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Though it in thee cannot persèver;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For I had rather owner be</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of thee one hour, than all else ever.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="air-and-angels" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Air and Angels</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Twice or thrice had I loved thee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Before I knew thy face or name;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So in a voice, so in a shapeless flame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Angels affect us oft, and worshipp’d be.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Still when, to where thou wert, I came,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some lovely glorious nothing did I see.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But since my soul, whose child love is,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Takes limbs of flesh, and else could nothing do,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">More subtle than the parent is</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Love must not be, but take a body too;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And therefore what thou wert, and who,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">I bid love ask, and now</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That it assume thy body, I allow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And fix itself in thy lips, eyes, and brow.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Whilst thus to ballast love I thought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And so more steadily to have gone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With wares which would sink admiration,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I saw I had love’s pinnace overfraught;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thy every hair for love to work upon</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is much too much; some fitter must be sought;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For, nor in nothing, nor in things</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Extreme, and scattering bright, can love inhere;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then as an angel face and wings</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of air, not pure as it, yet pure doth wear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So thy love may be my love’s sphere;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Just such disparity</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As is ’twixt air’s and angels’ purity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Twixt women’s love, and men’s, will ever be.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="break-of-day" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<hgroup>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Break of Day</h3>
					<p hidden="hidden" epub:type="subtitle">’Tis True, ’Tis Day; What Though It Be?</p>
				</hgroup>
				<p>
					<span>’Tis true, ’tis day; what though it be?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O, wilt thou therefore rise from me?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Why should we rise because ’tis light?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Did we lie down because ’twas night?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Love, which in spite of darkness brought us hither,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Should in despite of light keep us together.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Light hath no tongue, but is all eye;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If it could speak as well as spy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This were the worst that it could say,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That being well I fain would stay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And that I loved my heart and honour so,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That I would not from him, that had them, go.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Must business thee from hence remove?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O! that’s the worst disease of love,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The poor, the foul, the false, love can</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Admit, but not the busied man.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He which hath business, and makes love, doth do</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such wrong, as when a married man doth woo.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="the-anniversary" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">The Anniversary</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">All kings, and all their favourites,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All glory of honours, beauties, wits,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The sun itself, which makes time, as they pass,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is elder by a year now than it was</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When thou and I first one another saw.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All other things to their destruction draw,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Only our love hath no decay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This no to-morrow hath, nor yesterday;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Running it never runs from us away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But truly keeps his first, last, everlasting day.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Two graves must hide thine and my corse;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If one might, death were no divorce.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Alas! as well as other princes, we</span>
					<br/>
					<span>—Who prince enough in one another be⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Must leave at last in death these eyes and ears,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Oft fed with true oaths, and with sweet salt tears;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But souls where nothing dwells but love</span>
					<br/>
					<span>—All other thoughts being inmates⁠—then shall prove</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This or a love increasèd there above,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When bodies to their graves, souls from their graves remove.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">And then we shall be throughly blest;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But now no more than all the rest.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Here upon earth we’re kings, and none but we</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Can be such kings, nor of such subjects be.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who is so safe as we? where none can do</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Treason to us, except one of us two.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">True and false fears let us refrain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let us love nobly, and live, and add again</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Years and years unto years, till we attain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To write threescore; this is the second of our reign.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="a-valediction-of-my-name-in-the-window" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">A Valediction of My Name, in the Window</h3>
				<section id="a-valediction-of-my-name-in-the-window-1">
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span class="i2">My name engraved herein</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Doth contribute my firmness to this glass,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Which ever since that charm hath been</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">As hard, as that which graved it was;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thine eye will give it price enough, to mock</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">The diamonds of either rock.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="a-valediction-of-my-name-in-the-window-2">
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span class="i2">’Tis much that glass should be</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As all-confessing, and through-shine as I;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">’Tis more that it shows thee to thee,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And clear reflects thee to thine eye.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But all such rules love’s magic can undo;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">Here you see me, and I am you.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="a-valediction-of-my-name-in-the-window-3">
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span class="i2">As no one point, nor dash,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Which are but accessories to this name,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">The showers and tempests can outwas</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">So shall all times find me the same;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>You this entireness better may fulfill,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">Who have the pattern with you still.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="a-valediction-of-my-name-in-the-window-4">
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span class="i2">Or if too hard and deep</span>
						<br/>
						<span>This learning be, for a scratch’d name to teach,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">It as a given death’s head keep,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Lovers’ mortality to preach;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or think this ragged bony name to be</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">My ruinous anatomy.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="a-valediction-of-my-name-in-the-window-5">
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">V</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span class="i2">Then, as all my souls be</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Emparadised in you⁠—in whom alone</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">I understand, and grow, and see⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">The rafters of my body, bone,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Being still with you, the muscle, sinew, and vein</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">Which tile this house, will come again.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="a-valediction-of-my-name-in-the-window-6">
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VI</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span class="i2">Till my return repair</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And recompact my scatter’d body so,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">As all the virtuous powers which are</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Fix’d in the stars are said to flow</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Into such characters as gravèd be</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">When these stars have supremacy.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="a-valediction-of-my-name-in-the-window-7">
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VII</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span class="i2">So since this name was cut,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>When love and grief their exaltation had,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">No door ’gainst this name’s influence shut.</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">As much more loving, as more sad,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>’Twill make thee; and thou shouldst, till I return,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">Since I die daily, daily mourn.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="a-valediction-of-my-name-in-the-window-8">
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VIII</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span class="i2">When thy inconsiderate hand</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Flings ope this casement, with my trembling name,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">To look on one, whose wit or land</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">New battery to thy heart may frame,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Then think this name alive, and that thou thus</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">In it offend’st my Genius.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="a-valediction-of-my-name-in-the-window-9">
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IX</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span class="i2">And when thy melted maid,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Corrupted by thy lover’s gold and page,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">His letter at thy pillow hath laid,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Disputed it, and tamed thy rage,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And thou begin’st to thaw towards him, for this,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">May my name step in, and hide his.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="a-valediction-of-my-name-in-the-window-10">
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">X</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span class="i2">And if this treason go</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To an overt act and that thou write again,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">In superscribing, this name flow</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Into thy fancy from the pane;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So, in forgetting thou rememb’rest right,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">And unaware to me shalt write.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="a-valediction-of-my-name-in-the-window-11">
					<header>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XI</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span class="i2">But glass and lines must be</span>
						<br/>
						<span>No means our firm substantial love to keep;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Near death inflicts this lethargy,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And this I murmur in my sleep;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Impute this idle talk, to that I go,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">For dying men talk often so.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
			</article>
			<article id="twickenham-garden" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Twickenham Garden</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Blasted with sighs, and surrounded with tears,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hither I come to seek the spring,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And at mine eyes, and at mine ears,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Receive such balms as else cure every thing.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But O! self-traitor, I do bring</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The spider Love, which transubstantiates all,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And can convert manna to gall;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And that this place may thoroughly be thought</span>
					<br/>
					<span>True paradise, I have the serpent brought.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>’Twere wholesomer for me that winter did</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Benight the glory of this place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And that a grave frost did forbid</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">These trees to laugh and mock me to my face;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But that I may not this disgrace</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Endure, nor yet leave loving, Love, let me</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some senseless piece of this place be;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Make me a mandrake, so I may grow here,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or a stone fountain weeping out my year.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Hither with crystal phials, lovers, come,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And take my tears, which are love’s wine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And try your mistress’ tears at home,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For all are false, that taste not just like mine.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Alas! hearts do not in eyes shine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor can you more judge women’s thoughts by tears,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than by her shadow what she wears.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O perverse sex, where none is true but she,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who’s therefore true, because her truth kills me.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="a-valediction-to-his-book" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">A Valediction to His Book</h3>
				<p>
					<span>I’ll tell thee now (dear love) what thou shalt do</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To anger destiny, as she doth us;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How I shall stay, though she eloign me thus,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And how posterity shall know it too;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">How thine may out-endure</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">Sibyl’s glory, and obscure</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">Her who from Pindar could allure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And her, through whose help Lucan is not lame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And her, whose book (they say) Homer did find, and name.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Study our manuscripts, those myriads</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of letters, which have past ’twixt thee and me;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thence write our annals, and in them will be</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To all whom love’s subliming fire invades</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">Rule and example found;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">There the faith of any ground</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">No schismatic will dare to wound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That sees, how Love this grace to us affords,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To make, to keep, to use, to be these his records.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>This book, as long-lived as the elements,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or as the world’s form, this all-gravèd tome</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In cypher writ, or new made idiom;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We for Love’s clergy only are instruments;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">When this book is made thus,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">Should again the ravenous</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">Vandals and the Goths invade us,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Learning were safe; in this our universe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Schools might learn sciences, spheres music, angels verse.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Here Love’s divines⁠—since all divinity</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is love or wonder⁠—may find all they seek,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whether abstract spiritual love they like,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their souls exhaled with what they do not see;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">Or, loth so to amuse Faith’s infirmity, they choose</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">Something which they may see and use;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">For, though mind be the heaven, where love doth sit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beauty a convenient type may be to figure it.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Here more than in their books may lawyers find,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Both by what titles mistresses are ours,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And how prerogative these states devours,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Transferr’d from Love himself, to womankind;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">Who, though from heart and eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">They exact great subsidies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">Forsake him who on them relies;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And for the cause, honour, or conscience give;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Chimeras vain as they or their prerogative.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Here statesmen⁠—or of them, they which can read⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">May of their occupation find the grounds;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Love, and their art, alike it deadly wounds,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If to consider what ’tis, one proceed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">In both they do excel,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">Who the present govern well,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">Whose weakness none doth, or dares tell;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In this thy book, such will there something see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As in the Bible some can find out alchemy.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thus vent thy thoughts; abroad I’ll study thee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As he removes far off, that great heights takes;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How great love is, presence best trial makes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But absence tries how long this love will be;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">To take a latitude</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">Sun, or stars, are fitliest view’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">At their brightest, but to conclude</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of longitudes, what other way have we,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But to mark when and where the dark eclipses be?</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="community" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Community</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Good we must love, and must hate ill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For ill is ill, and good good still;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But there are things indifferent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which we may neither hate, nor love,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But one, and then another prove,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As we shall find our fancy bent.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>If then at first wise Nature had</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Made women either good or bad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then some we might hate, and some choose;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But since she did them so create,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That we may neither love, nor hate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Only this rests, all all may use.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>If they were good, it would be seen;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Good is as visible as green,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to all eyes itself betrays.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If they were bad, they could not last;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bad doth itself and others waste;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So they deserve nor blame, nor praise.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But they are ours as fruits are ours;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He that but tastes, he that devours,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And he that leaves all, doth as well;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Changed loves are but changed sorts of meat;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And when he hath the kernel eat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who doth not fling away the shell?</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="loves-growth" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Love’s Growth</h3>
				<p>
					<span>I scarce believe my love to be so pure</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">As I had thought it was,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">Because it doth endure</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Vicissitude, and season, as the grass;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Methinks I lied all winter, when I swore</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My love was infinite, if spring make it more.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But if this medicine, love, which cures all sorrow</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With more, not only be no quintessence,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But mix’d of all stuffs, vexing soul, or sense,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And of the sun his active vigour borrow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Love’s not so pure, and abstract as they use</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To say, which have no mistress but their Muse;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But as all else, being elemented too,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Love sometimes would contemplate, sometimes do.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And yet no greater, but more eminent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">Love by the spring is grown;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">As in the firmament</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stars by the sun are not enlarged, but shown,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gentle love deeds, as blossoms on a bough,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From love’s awaken’d root do bud out now.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>If, as in water stirr’d more circles be</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Produced by one, love such additions take,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Those like so many spheres but one heaven make,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For they are all concentric unto thee;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And though each spring do add to love new heat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As princes do in times of action get</span>
					<br/>
					<span>New taxes, and remit them not in peace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No winter shall abate this spring’s increase.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="loves-exchange" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Love’s Exchange</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Love, any devil else but you</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Would for a given soul give something too.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At court your fellows every day</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Give th’ art of rhyming, huntsmanship, or play,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For them which were their own before;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Only I have nothing, which gave more,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But am, alas! by being lowly, lower.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>I ask no dispensation now,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To falsify a tear, or sigh, or vow;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I do not sue from thee to draw</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A <i xml:lang="fr">non obstante</i> on nature’s law;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These are prerogatives, they inhere</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In thee and thine; none should forswear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Except that he Love’s minion were.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Give me thy weakness, make me blind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Both ways, as thou and thine, in eyes and mind;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Love, let me never know that this</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is love, or, that love childish is;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let me not know that others know</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That she knows my pains, lest that so</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A tender shame make me mine own new woe.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>If thou give nothing, yet thou ’rt just,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Because I would not thy first motions trust;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Small towns which stand stiff, till great shot</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Enforce them, by war’s law condition not;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such in Love’s warfare is my case;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I may not article for grace, Having put</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Love at last to show this face.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>This face, by which he could command</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And change th’ idolatry of any land,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This face, which, wheresoe’er it comes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Can call vow’d men from cloisters, dead from tombs,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And melt both poles at once, and store</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Deserts with cities, and make more</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mines in the earth, than quarries were before.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>For this Love is enraged with me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet kills not; if I must example be</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To future rebels, if th’ unborn</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Must learn by my being cut up and torn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Kill, and dissect me, Love; for this</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Torture against thine own end is;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rack’d carcasses make ill anatomies.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="confined-love" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Confined Love</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Some man unworthy to be possessor</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of old or new love, himself being false or weak,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thought his pain and shame would be lesser,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If on womankind he might his anger wreak;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">And thence a law did grow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">One might but one man know;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">But are other creatures so?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Are sun, moon, or stars by law forbidden</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To smile where they list, or lend away their light?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Are birds divorced or are they chidden</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If they leave their mate, or lie abroad a night?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Beasts do no jointures lose</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Though they new lovers choose;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">But we are made worse than those.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Whoe’er rigg’d fair ships to lie in harbours,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And not to seek lands, or not to deal with all?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or built fair houses, set trees, and arbours,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Only to lock up, or else to let them fall?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Good is not good, unless</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">A thousand it possess,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">But doth waste with greediness.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="the-dream" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">The Dream</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Dear love, for nothing less than thee</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Would I have broke this happy dream;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i6">It was a theme</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For reason, much too strong for fantasy.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Therefore thou waked’st me wisely; yet</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My dream thou brokest not, but continued’st it.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou art so true that thoughts of thee suffice</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To make dreams truths, and fables histories;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Enter these arms, for since thou thought’st it best,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not to dream all my dream, let’s act the rest.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>As lightning, or a taper’s light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thine eyes, and not thy noise waked me;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i6">Yet I thought thee</span>
					<br/>
					<span>—For thou lovest truth⁠—an angel, at first sight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But when I saw thou saw’st my heart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And knew’st my thoughts beyond an angel’s art,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When thou knew’st what I dreamt, when thou knew’st when</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Excess of joy would wake me, and camest then,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I must confess, it could not choose but be</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Profane, to think thee any thing but thee.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Coming and staying show’d thee, thee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But rising makes me doubt, that now</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i6">Thou art not thou.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That love is weak where fear’s as strong as he;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Tis not all spirit, pure and brave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If mixture it of fear, shame, honour have;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Perchance as torches, which must ready be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Men light and put out, so thou deal’st with me;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou camest to kindle, go’st to come; then I</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Will dream that hope again, but else would die.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="a-valediction-of-weeping" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">A Valediction of Weeping</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i6">Let me pour forth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My tears before thy face, whilst I stay here,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For thy face coins them, and thy stamp they bear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And by this mintage they are something worth.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i6">For thus they be</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i6">Pregnant of thee;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fruits of much grief they are, emblems of more;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When a tear falls, that thou fall’st which it bore;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So thou and I are nothing then, when on a divers shore.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i6">On a round ball</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A workman, that hath copies by, can lay</span>
					<br/>
					<span>An Europe, Afric, and an Asia,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And quickly make that, which was nothing, all.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i6">So doth each tear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i6">Which thee doth wear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A globe, yea world, by that impression grow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till thy tears mix’d with mine do overflow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This world, by waters sent from thee, my heaven dissolvèd so.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i6">O! more than moon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Draw not up seas to drown me in thy sphere;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Weep me not dead, in thine arms, but forbear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To teach the sea, what it may do too soon;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i6">Let not the wind</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i6">Example find</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To do me more harm than it purposeth:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Since thou and I sigh one another’s breath,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whoe’er sighs most is cruellest, and hastes the other’s death.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="loves-alchemy" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Love’s Alchemy</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Some that have deeper digg’d love’s mine than I,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Say, where his centric happiness doth lie.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">I have loved, and got, and told,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But should I love, get, tell, till I were old,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I should not find that hidden mystery.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">O! ’tis imposture all;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And as no chemic yet th’ elixir got,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">But glorifies his pregnant pot,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">If by the way to him befall</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some odoriferous thing, or medicinal,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">So, lovers dream a rich and long delight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">But get a winter-seeming summer’s night.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Our ease, our thrift, our honour, and our day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall we for this vain bubble’s shadow pay?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Ends love in this, that my man</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Can be as happy as I can, if he can</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Endure the short scorn of a bridegroom’s play?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">That loving wretch that swears,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Tis not the bodies marry, but the minds,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Which he in her angelic finds,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Would swear as justly, that he hears,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In that day’s rude hoarse minstrelsy, the spheres.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Hope not for mind in women; at their best,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Sweetness and wit they are, but mummy, possess’d.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="the-flea" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">The Flea</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Mark but this flea, and mark in this,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How little that which thou deniest me is;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It suck’d me first, and now sucks thee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in this flea our two bloods mingled be.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou know’st that this cannot be said</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A sin, nor shame, nor loss of maidenhead;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet this enjoys before it woo,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And pamper’d swells with one blood made of two;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And this, alas! is more than we would do.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>O stay, three lives in one flea spare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where we almost, yea, more than married are.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This flea is you and I, and this</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our marriage bed, and marriage temple is.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though parents grudge, and you, we’re met,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And cloister’d in these living walls of jet.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Though use make you apt to kill me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Let not to that self-murder added be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And sacrilege, three sins in killing three.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Cruel and sudden, hast thou since</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Purpled thy nail in blood of innocence?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wherein could this flea guilty be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Except in that drop which it suck’d from thee?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet thou triumph’st, and say’st that thou</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Find’st not thyself nor me the weaker now.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">’Tis true; then learn how false fears be;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Just so much honour, when thou yield’st to me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Will waste, as this flea’s death took life from thee.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="the-curse" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">The Curse</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Whoever guesses, thinks, or dreams, he knows</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who is my mistress, wither by this curse;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">Him, only for his purse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">May some dull whore to love dispose,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And then yield unto all that are his foes;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">May he be scorn’d by one, whom all else scorn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Forswear to others, what to her he hath sworn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With fear of missing, shame of getting, torn.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Madness his sorrow, gout his cramps, may he</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Make, by but thinking who hath made them such;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">And may he feel no touch</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">Of conscience, but of fame, and be</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Anguish’d, not that ’twas sin, but that ’twas she;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or may he for her virtue reverence</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">One that hates him only for impotence,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And equal traitors be she and his sense.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>May he dream treason, and believe that he</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Meant to perform it, and confess, and die,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">And no record tell why;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">His sons, which none of his may be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Inherit nothing but his infamy;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or may he so long parasites have fed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That he would fain be theirs whom he hath bred,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And at the last be circumcised for bread.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The venom of all stepdames, gamesters’ gall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What tyrants and their subjects interwish,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">What plants, mine, beasts, fowl, fish,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">Can contribute, all ill, which all</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Prophets or poets spake, and all which shall</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Be annex’d in schedules unto this by me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fall on that man; for if it be a she</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nature beforehand hath out-cursed me.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="the-message" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">The Message</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Send home my long stray’d eyes to me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which, O! too long have dwelt on thee;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet since there they have learn’d such ill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Such forced fashions,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">And false passions,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">That they be</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">Made by thee</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fit for no good sight, keep them still.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Send home my harmless heart again,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which no unworthy thought could stain;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But if it be taught by thine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">To make jestings</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Of protestings,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">And break both</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">Word and oath,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Keep it, for then ’tis none of mine.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Yet send me back my heart and eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That I may know, and see thy lies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And may laugh and joy, when thou</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Art in anguish</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">And dost languish</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">For some one</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">That will none,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or prove as false as thou art now.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="a-nocturnal-upon-st-lucys-day-being-the-shortest-day" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">A Nocturnal Upon <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">St.</abbr> Lucy’s Day, Being the Shortest Day</h3>
				<p>
					<span>’Tis the year’s midnight, and it is the day’s,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lucy’s, who scarce seven hours herself unmasks;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The sun is spent, and now his flasks</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Send forth light squibs, no constant rays;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">The world’s whole sap is sunk;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The general balm th’ hydroptic earth hath drunk,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whither, as to the bed’s-feet, life is shrunk,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dead and interr’d; yet all these seem to laugh,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Compared with me, who am their epitaph.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Study me then, you who shall lovers be</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At the next world, that is, at the next spring;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For I am a very dead thing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In whom Love wrought new alchemy.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">For his art did express</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A quintessence even from nothingness,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From dull privations, and lean emptiness;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He ruin’d me, and I am re-begot</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of absence, darkness, death⁠—things which are not.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>All others, from all things, draw all that’s good,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Life, soul, form, spirit, whence they being have;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I, by Love’s limbec, am the grave</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of all, that’s nothing. Oft a flood</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">Have we two wept, and so</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Drown’d the whole world, us two; oft did we grow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To be two chaoses, when we did show</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Care to aught else; and often absences</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Withdrew our souls, and made us carcasses.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But I am by her death⁠—which word wrongs her⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of the first nothing the elixir grown;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Were I a man, that I were one</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I needs must know; I should prefer,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">If I were any beast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some ends, some means; yea plants, yea stones detest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And love; all, all some properties invest.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If I an ordinary nothing were,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As shadow, a light, and body must be here.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But I am none; nor will my sun renew.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>You lovers, for whose sake the lesser sun</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At this time to the Goat is run</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To fetch new lust, and give it you,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">Enjoy your summer all,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Since she enjoys her long night’s festival.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let me prepare towards her, and let me call</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This hour her vigil, and her eve, since this</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Both the year’s and the day’s deep midnight is.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="witchcraft-by-a-picture" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Witchcraft by a Picture</h3>
				<p>
					<span>I fix mine eye on thine, and there</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Pity my picture burning in thine eye;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My picture drown’d in a transparent tear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When I look lower I espy;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Hadst thou the wicked skill</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By pictures made and marr’d, to kill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How many ways mightst thou perform thy will?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But now I’ve drunk thy sweet salt tears,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And though thou pour more, I’ll depart;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My picture vanished, vanish all fears</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That I can be endamaged by that art;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Though thou retain of me</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One picture more, yet that will be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Being in thine own heart, from all malice free.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="the-bait" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">The Bait</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Come live with me, and be my love,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And we will some new pleasures prove</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of golden sands, and crystal brooks,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With silken lines and silver hooks.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>There will the river whisp’ring run</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Warm’d by thy eyes, more than the sun;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And there th’ enamour’d fish will stay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Begging themselves they may betray.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>When thou wilt swim in that live bath,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Each fish, which every channel hath,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Will amorously to thee swim,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gladder to catch thee, than thou him.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>If thou, to be so seen, be’st loth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By sun or moon, thou dark’nest both,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And if myself have leave to see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I need not their light, having thee.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Let others freeze with angling reeds,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And cut their legs with shells and weeds,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or treacherously poor fish beset,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With strangling snare, or windowy net.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Let coarse bold hands from slimy nest</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The bedded fish in banks out-wrest;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or curious traitors, sleeve-silk flies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bewitch poor fishes’ wand’ring eyes.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>For thee, thou need’st no such deceit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For thou thyself art thine own bait:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That fish, that is not catch’d thereby,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Alas! is wiser far than I.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="the-apparition" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">The Apparition</h3>
				<p>
					<span>When by thy scorn, O murd’ress, I am dead,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And that thou think’st thee free</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From all solicitation from me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then shall my ghost come to thy bed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thee, feign’d vestal, in worse arms shall see:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then thy sick taper will begin to wink,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And he, whose thou art then, being tired before,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Will, if thou stir, or pinch to wake him, think</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">Thou call’st for more,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, in false sleep, will from thee shrink:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And then, poor aspen wretch, neglected thou</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bathed in a cold quicksilver sweat wilt lie</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">A verier ghost than I.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What I will say, I will not tell thee now,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lest that preserve thee; and since my love is spent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I’d rather thou shouldst painfully repent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than by my threatenings rest still innocent.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="the-broken-heart" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">The Broken Heart</h3>
				<p>
					<span>He is stark mad, whoever says,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That he hath been in love an hour,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet not that love so soon decays,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But that it can ten in less space</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who will believe me, if I swear devour;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That I have had the plague a year?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who would not laugh at me, if I should say</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I saw a flash of powder burn a day?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Ah, what a trifle is a heart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If once into love’s hands it come!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All other griefs allow a part</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To other griefs, and ask themselves but some;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They come to us, but us love draws;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He swallows us and never chaws;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By him, as by chain’d shot, whole ranks do die;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He is the tyrant pike, our hearts the fry.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>If ’twere not so, what did become</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of my heart when I first saw thee?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I brought a heart into the room,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But from the room I carried none with me.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If it had gone to thee, I know</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mine would have taught thine heart to show</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">More pity unto me; but Love, alas!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At one first blow did shiver it as glass.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Yet nothing can to nothing fall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor any place be empty quite;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Therefore I think my breast hath all</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Those pieces still, though they be not unite;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And now, as broken glasses show</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A hundred lesser faces, so</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My rags of heart can like, wish, and adore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But after one such love, can love no more.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="a-valediction-forbidding-mourning" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">A Valediction Forbidding Mourning</h3>
				<p>
					<span>As virtuous men pass mildly away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And whisper to their souls to go,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whilst some of their sad friends do say,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Now his breath goes,” and some say, “No.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So let us melt, and make no noise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">No tear-floods, nor sigh-tempests move;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Twere profanation of our joys</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To tell the laity our love.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Moving of th’ earth brings harms and fears;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Men reckon what it did, and meant;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But trepidation of the spheres,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Though greater far, is innocent.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Dull sublunary lovers’ love</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">—Whose soul is sense⁠—cannot admit</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of absence, ’cause it doth remove</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The thing which elemented it.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But we by a love so far refined,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That ourselves know not what it is,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Inter-assured of the mind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Care less eyes, lips and hands to miss.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Our two souls therefore, which are one,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Though I must go, endure not yet</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A breach, but an expansion,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like gold to airy thinness beat.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>If they be two, they are two so</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As stiff twin compasses are two;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy soul, the fix’d foot, makes no show</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To move, but doth, if th’ other do.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And though it in the centre sit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet, when the other far doth roam,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It leans, and hearkens after it,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And grows erect, as that comes home.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Such wilt thou be to me, who must,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like th’ other foot, obliquely run;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy firmness makes my circle just,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And makes me end where I begun.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="the-ecstacy" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">The Ecstacy</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Where, like a pillow on a bed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A pregnant bank swell’d up, to rest</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The violet’s reclining head,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sat we two, one another’s best.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Our hands were firmly cemented</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By a fast balm, which thence did spring;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our eye-beams twisted, and did thread</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Our eyes upon one double string.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So to engraft our hands, as yet</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was all the means to make us one;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And pictures in our eyes to get</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was all our propagation.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>As, ’twixt two equal armies, Fate</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Suspends uncertain victory,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our souls⁠—which to advance their state,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Were gone out⁠—hung ’twixt her and me.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And whilst our souls negotiate there,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">We like sepulchral statues lay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All day, the same our postures were,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And we said nothing, all the day.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>If any, so by love refined,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That he soul’s language understood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And by good love were grown all mind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Within convenient distance stood,</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He⁠—though he knew not which soul spake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Because both meant, both spake the same⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Might thence a new concoction take,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And part far purer than he came.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>This ecstacy doth unperplex</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(We said) and tell us what we love;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We see by this, it was not sex;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">We see, we saw not, what did move:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But as all several souls contain</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Mixture of things they know not what,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Love these mix’d souls doth mix again,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And makes both one, each this, and that.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>A single violet transplant,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The strength, the colour, and the size⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All which before was poor and scant⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Redoubles still, and multiplies.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>When love with one another so</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Interanimates two souls,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That abler soul, which thence doth flow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Defects of loneliness controls.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>We then, who are this new soul, know,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of what we are composed, and made,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For th’ atomies of which we grow</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Are souls, whom no change can invade.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But, O alas! so long, so far,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Our bodies why do we forbear?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They are ours, though not we; we are</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Th’ intelligences, they the spheres.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>We owe them thanks, because they thus</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did us, to us, at first convey,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yielded their senses’ force to us,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor are dross to us, but allay.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>On man heaven’s influence works not so,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But that it first imprints the air;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For soul into the soul may flow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Though it to body first repair.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>As our blood labours to beget</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Spirits, as like souls as it can;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Because such fingers need to knit</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That subtle knot, which makes us man;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So must pure lovers’ souls descend</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To affections, and to faculties,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which sense may reach and apprehend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Else a great prince in prison lies.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>To our bodies turn we then, that so</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Weak men on love reveal’d may look;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Love’s mysteries in souls do grow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But yet the body is his book.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And if some lover, such as we,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Have heard this dialogue of one,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let him still mark us, he shall see</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Small change when we’re to bodies gone</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="loves-deity" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Love’s Deity</h3>
				<p>
					<span>I long to talk with some old lover’s ghost,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who died before the god of love was born.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I cannot think that he, who then loved most,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sunk so low as to love one which did scorn.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But since this god produced a destiny,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And that vice-nature, custom, lets it be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I must love her that loves not me.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Sure, they which made him god, meant not so much,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor he in his young godhead practised it.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But when an even flame two hearts did touch,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His office was indulgently to fit</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Actives to passives. Correspondency</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Only his subject was; it cannot be</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Love, till I love her, who loves me.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But every modern god will now extend</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His vast prerogative as far as Jove.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To rage, to lust, to write to, to commend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All is the purlieu of the god of love.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O! were we waken’d by this tyranny</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To ungod this child again, it could not be</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I should love her, who loves not me.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Rebel and atheist too, why murmur I,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As though I felt the worst that love could do?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Love may make me leave loving, or might try</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A deeper plague, to make her love me too;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which, since she loves before, I’m loth to see.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Falsehood is worse than hate; and that must be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If she whom I love, should love me.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="loves-diet" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Love’s Diet</h3>
				<p>
					<span>To what a cumbersome unwieldiness</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And burdenous corpulence my love had grown,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But that I did, to make it less,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And keep it in proportion,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Give it a diet, made it feed upon</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That which love worst endures, discretion.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Above one sigh a day I allow’d him not,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of which my fortune, and my faults had part;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And if sometimes by stealth he got</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A she sigh from my mistress’ heart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thought to feast on that, I let him see</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Twas neither very sound, nor meant to me.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>If he wrung from me a tear, I brined it so</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With scorn or shame, that him it nourish’d not;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If he suck’d hers, I let him know</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">’Twas not a tear which he had got;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His drink was counterfeit, as was his meat;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For eyes, which roll towards all, weep not, but sweat.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Whatever he would dictate I writ that,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But burnt her letters when she writ to me;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And if that favour made him fat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I said, “If any title be</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Convey’d by this, ah! what doth it avail,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To be the fortieth name in an entail?”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thus I reclaim’d my buzzard love, to flie</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At what, and when, and how, and where I choose.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now negligent of sports I lie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And now, as other falconers use,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I spring a mistress, swear, write, sigh, and weep;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the game kill’d, or lost, go talk or sleep.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="the-will" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">The Will</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Before I sigh my last gasp, let me breathe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Great Love, some legacies; I here bequeath</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Mine eyes to Argus, if mine eyes can see;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If they be blind, then, Love, I give them thee;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My tongue to Fame; to ambassadors mine ears;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">To women or the sea, my tears:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Thou, Love, hast taught me heretofore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By making me serve her who had twenty more,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That I should give to none, but such as had too much before.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">My constancy I to the planets give;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My truth to them who at the court do live;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Mine ingenuity and openness,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To Jesuits; to buffoons my pensiveness;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My silence to any, who abroad hath been;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">My money to a Capuchin:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Thou, Love, taught’st me, by appointing me</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To love there, where no love received can be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Only to give to such as have an incapacity.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">My faith I give to Roman Catholics;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All my good works unto the Schismatics</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Amsterdam; my best civility</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And courtship to an University;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My modesty I give to soldiers bare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">My patience let gamesters share:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Thou, Love, taught’st me, by making me</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Love her that holds my love disparity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Only to give to those that count my gifts indignity.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">I give my reputation to those</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which were my friends; mine industry to foes;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To schoolmen I bequeath my doubtfulness;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My sickness to physicians, or excess;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To nature all that I in rhyme have writ;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">And to my company my wit:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Thou, Love, by making me adore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her, who begot this love in me before,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Taught’st me to make, as though I gave, when I do but restore.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">To him for whom the passing-bell next tolls,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I give my physic books; my written rolls</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of moral counsels I to Bedlam give;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My brazen medals unto them which live</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In want of bread; to them which pass among</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">All foreigners, mine English tongue:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Thou, Love, by making me love one</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who thinks her friendship a fit portion</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For younger lovers, dost my gifts thus disproportion.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Therefore I’ll give no more, but I’ll undo</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The world by dying, because love dies too.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then all your beauties will be no more worth</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Than gold in mines, where none doth draw it forth;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all your graces no more use shall have,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">Than a sun-dial in a grave:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Thou, Love, taught’st me by making me</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Love her who doth neglect both me and thee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To invent, and practise this one way, to annihilate all three.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="the-funeral" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">The Funeral</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Whoever Comes to shroud me, do not harm,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">Nor question much,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That subtle wreath of hair, which crowns my arm;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The mystery, the sign you must not touch;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">For ’tis my outward soul,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Viceroy to that, which unto heaven being gone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">Will leave this to control</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And keep these limbs, her provinces, from dissolution.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>For if the sinewy thread my brain lets fall</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">Through every part</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Can tie those parts, and make me one of all,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Those hairs which upward grew, and strength and art</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">Have from a better brain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Can better do ’t; except she meant that I</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">By this should know my pain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As prisoners then are manacled, when they’re condemn’d to die.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Whate’er she meant by it, bury it with me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">For since I am</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Love’s martyr, it might breed idolatry,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If into other hands these relics came.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">As ’twas humility</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To afford to it all that a soul can do,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">So ’tis some bravery,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That since you would have none of me, I bury some of you.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="the-blossom" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">The Blossom</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Little think’st thou, poor flower,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom I’ve watch’d six or seven days,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And seen thy birth, and seen what every hour</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gave to thy growth, thee to this height to raise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And now dost laugh and triumph on this bough,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">Little think’st thou,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That it will freeze anon, and that I shall</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To-morrow find thee fallen, or not at all.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Little think’st thou, poor heart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That labourest yet to nestle thee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And think’st by hovering here to get a part</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In a forbidden or forbidding tree,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And hopest her stiffness by long siege to bow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">Little think’st thou,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That thou to-morrow, ere that sun doth wake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Must with this sun and me a journey take.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">But thou which lovest to be</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Subtle to plague thyself, wilt say,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Alas! if you must go, what’s that to me?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Here lies my business, and here I will stay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>You go to friends, whose love and means present</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">Various content</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To your eyes, ears, and taste, and every part;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If then your body go, what need your heart?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Well then, stay here; but know,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When thou hast stay’d and done thy most,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A naked thinking heart, that makes no show,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is to a woman but a kind of ghost.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How shall she know my heart; or having none,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">Know thee for one?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Practice may make her know some other part;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But take my word, she doth not know a heart.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Meet me at London, then,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Twenty days hence, and thou shalt see</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Me fresher, and more fat, by being with men,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than if I had stay’d still with her and thee.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For God’s sake, if you can, be you so too;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">I will give you</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There to another friend, whom we shall find</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As glad to have my body as my mind.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="the-primrose-being-at-montgomery-castle-upon-the-hill-on-which-it-is-situate" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">The Primrose, Being at Montgomery Castle Upon the Hill, on Which It Is Situate</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i4">Upon this Primrose hill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">Where, if heaven would distil</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A shower of rain, each several drop might go</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To his own primrose, and grow manna so;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And where their form, and their infinity</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">Make a terrestrial galaxy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">As the small stars do in the sky;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I walk to find a true love; and I see</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That ’tis not a mere woman, that is she,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But must or more or less than woman be</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i4">Yet know I not, which flower</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">I wish; a six, or four;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For should my true-love less than woman be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She were scarce anything; and then, should she</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Be more than woman, she would get above</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">All thought of sex, and think to move</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">My heart to study her, and not to love.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Both these were monsters; since there must reside</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Falsehood in woman, I could more abide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She were by art, than nature falsified.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i4">Live, primrose, then, and thrive</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">With thy true number five;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, woman, whom this flower doth represent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With this mysterious number be content;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ten is the farthest number; if half ten</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">Belongs unto each woman, then</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">Each woman may take half us men;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or⁠—if this will not serve their turn⁠—since all</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Numbers are odd, or even, and they fall</span>
					<br/>
					<span>First into five, women may take us all.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="the-relic" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">The Relic</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i4">When my grave is broke up again</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">Some second guest to entertain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">—For graves have learn’d that woman-head,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">To be to more than one a bed⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i5">And he that digs it, spies</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A bracelet of bright hair about the bone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i5">Will not he let us alone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And think that there a loving couple lies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who thought that this device might be some way</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To make their souls at the last busy day</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Meet at this grave, and make a little stay?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i4">If this fall in a time, or land,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">Where mass-devotion doth command,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">Then he that digs us up will bring</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">Us to the bishop or the king,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i5">To make us relics; then</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou shalt be a Mary Magdalen, and I</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i5">A something else thereby;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All women shall adore us, and some men.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, since at such time miracles are sought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I would have that age by this paper taught</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What miracles we harmless lovers wrought.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i4">First we loved well and faithfully,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">Yet knew not what we loved, nor why;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">Difference of sex we never knew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">No more than guardian angels do;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i5">Coming and going we</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Perchance might kiss, but not between those meals;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i5">Our hands ne’er touch’d the seals,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which nature, injured by late law, sets free.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These miracles we did; but now alas!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All measure, and all language, I should pass,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Should I tell what a miracle she was.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="the-damp" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">The Damp</h3>
				<p>
					<span>When I am dead, and doctors know not why,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i5">And my friends’ curiosity</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Will have me cut up to survey each part,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When they shall find your picture in my heart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">You think a sudden damp of love</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">Will thorough all their senses move,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And work on them as me, and so prefer</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Your murder to the name of massacre,</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Poor victories; but if you dare be brave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i5">And pleasure in your conquest have,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>First kill th’ enorinous giant, your Disdain;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And let th’ enchantress Honour, next be slain;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">And like a Goth or Vandal rise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">Deface records and histories</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of your own arts and triumphs over men,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And without such advantage kill me then,</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>For I could muster up, as well as you,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i5">My giants, and my witches too,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which are vast Constancy and Secretness;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But these I neither look for nor profess;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">Kill me as woman, let me die</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">As a mere man; do you but try</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Your passive valour, and you shall find then,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Naked you have odds enough of any man.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="the-dissolution" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">The Dissolution</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">She’s dead; and all which die</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">To their first elements resolve;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And we were mutual elements to us,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">And made of one another.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My body then doth hers involve,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And those things whereof I consist hereby</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In me abundant grow, and burdenous,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">And nourish not, but smother.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My fire of passion, sighs of air,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Water of tears, and earthy sad despair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">Which my materials be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But near worn out by love’s security,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She, to my loss, doth by her death repair.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I might live long wretched so,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But that my fire doth with my fuel grow.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Now, as those active kings</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose foreign conquest treasure brings,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Receive more, and spend more, and soonest break,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This⁠—which I am amazed that I can speak⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">This death, hath with my store</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">My use increased.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And so my soul, more earnestly released,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Will outstrip hers; as bullets flown before</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A later bullet may o’ertake, the powder being more.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="a-jet-ring-sent" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">A Jet Ring Sent</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i2">Thou art not so black as my heart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor half so brittle as her heart, thou art;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What wouldst thou say? shall both our properties by thee be spoke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">—Nothing more endless, nothing sooner broke?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i2">Marriage rings are not of this stuff;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Oh, why should ought less precious, or less tough,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Figure our loves? except in thy name thou have bid it say</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“⁠—I’m cheap, and nought but fashion; fling me away.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i2">Yet stay with me since thou art come,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Circle this finger’s top, which didst her thumb;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Be justly proud, and gladly safe, that thou dost dwell with me;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She that, O! broke her faith, would soon break thee.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<!-- Start Proofread -->
			<article id="negative-love" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Negative Love</h3>
				<p>
					<span>I never stoop’d so low, as they</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which on an eye, cheek, lip, can prey;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Seldom to them which soar no higher</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Than virtue, or the mind to admire.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For sense and understanding may</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Know what gives fuel to their fire;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My love, though silly, is more brave;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For may I miss, whene’er I crave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If I know yet what I would have.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>If that be simply perfectest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which can by no way be express’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But negatives, my love is so.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To all, which all love, I say no.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If any who deciphers best,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What we know not⁠—ourselves⁠—can know,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let him teach me that nothing. This</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As yet my ease and comfort is,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though I speed not, I cannot miss.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="the-prohibition" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">The Prohibition</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i3">Take heed of loving me;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At least remember, I forbade it thee;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not that I shall repair my unthrifty waste</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of breath and blood, upon thy sighs and tears,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By being to thee then what to me thou wast;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But so great joy our life at once outwears.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then, lest thy love by my death frustrate be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If thou love me, take heed of loving me.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i3">Take heed of hating me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or too much triumph in the victory;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not that I shall be mine own officer,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And hate with hate again retaliate;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But thou wilt lose the style of conqueror,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If I, thy conquest, perish by thy hate.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then, lest my being nothing lessen thee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If thou hate me, take heed of hating me.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i3">Yet love and hate me too;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So these extremes shall ne’er their office do;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Love me, that I may die the gentler way;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hate me, because thy love’s too great for me;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or let these two, themselves, not me, decay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So shall I live thy stage, not triumph be.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lest thou thy love and hate, and me undo,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O let me live, yet love and hate me too.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="the-expiration" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">The Expiration</h3>
				<p>
					<span>So, so, break off this last lamenting kiss,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which sucks two souls, and vapours both away;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Turn, thou ghost, that way, and let me turn this,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And let ourselves benight our happiest day.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We ask none leave to love; nor will we owe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Any so cheap a death as saying, “Go.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Go; and if that word have not quite killed thee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ease me with death, by bidding me go too.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or, if it have, let my word work on me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And a just office on a murderer do.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Except it be too late, to kill me so,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Being double dead, going, and bidding, “Go.”</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="the-computation" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">The Computation</h3>
				<p>
					<span>For my first twenty years, since yesterday,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I scarce believed thou couldst be gone away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For forty more I fed on favours past,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And forty on hopes, that thou wouldst they might last;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tears drown’d one hundred, and sighs blew out two;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A thousand, I did neither think, nor do,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or not divide, all being one thought of you;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or in a thousand more, forgot that too.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet call not this long life; but think that I</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Am, by being dead, immortal; can ghosts die?</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="the-paradox" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">The Paradox</h3>
				<p>
					<span>No lover saith, I love, nor any other</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">Can judge a perfect lover;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He thinks that else none can or will agree,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">That any loves but he;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I cannot say I loved, for who can say</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">He was kill’d yesterday.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Love with excess of heat, more young than old,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">Death kills with too much cold;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We die but once, and who loved last did die,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">He that saith, twice, doth lie;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For though he seem to move, and stir a while,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">It doth the sense beguile.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such life is like the light which bideth yet</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">When the life’s light is set,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or like the heat which fire in solid matter</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">Leaves behind, two hours after.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Once I loved and died; and am now become</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">Mine epitaph and tomb;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Here dead men speak their last, and so do I;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">Love-slain, lo! here I die.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="farewell-to-love" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Farewell to Love</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i4">Whilst yet to prove</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I thought there was some deity in love,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So did I reverence, and gave</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Worship; as atheists at their dying hour</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Call, what they cannot name, an unknown power,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As ignorantly did I crave.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i6">Thus when</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Things not yet known are coveted by men,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Our desires give them fashion, and so</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As they wax lesser, fall, as they size, grow.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i3">But, from late fair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His highness sitting in a golden chair</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is not less cared for after three days</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By children, than the thing which lovers so</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Blindly admire, and with such worship woo;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Being had, enjoying it decays;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i6">And thence,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What before pleased them all, takes but one sense,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And that so lamely, as it leaves behind</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A kind of sorrowing dullness to the mind.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i3">Ah, cannot we,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As well as cocks and lions, jocund be</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">After such pleasures, unless wise</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nature decreed⁠—since each such act, they say,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Diminisheth the length of life a day⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This; as she would man should despise</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i6">The sport,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Because that other curse of being short,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And only for a minute made to be</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Eager, desires to raise posterity.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i3">Since so, my mind</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall not desire what no man else can find;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I’ll no more dote and run</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To pursue things which had endamaged me;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And when I come where moving beauties be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As men do when the summer’s sun</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i6">Grows great,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though I admire their greatness, shun their heat.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Each place can afford shadows; if all fail,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Tis but applying worm-seed to the tail.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="a-lecture-upon-the-shadow" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">A Lecture Upon the Shadow</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Stand still, and I will read to thee</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A lecture, Love, in Love’s philosophy.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">These three hours that we have spent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Walking here, two shadows went</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Along with us, which we ourselves produced.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But, now the sun is just above our head,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">We do those shadows tread,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">And to brave clearness all things are reduced.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So whilst our infant loves did grow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Disguises did, and shadows, flow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From us and our cares; but now ’tis not so.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>That love has not attain’d the highest degree,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which is still diligent lest others see.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Except our loves at this noon stay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We shall new shadows make the other way.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">As the first were made to blind</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Others, these which come behind</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Will work upon ourselves, and blind our eyes.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If our loves faint, and westwardly decline,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">To me thou, falsely, thine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">And I to thee mine actions shall disguise.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The morning shadows wear away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But these grow longer all the day;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But O! love’s day is short, if love decay.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Love is a growing, or full constant light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And his short minute, after noon, is night.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="the-token" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">The Token</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Send me some tokens, that my hope may live</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or that my easeless thoughts may sleep and rest;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Send me some honey, to make sweet my hive,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That in my passions I may hope the best.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I beg nor ribbon wrought with thine own hands,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To knit our loves in the fantastic strain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of new-touch’d youth; nor ring to show the stands</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of our affection, that, as that’s round and plain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So should our loves meet in simplicity;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">No, nor the corals, which thy wrist enfold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Laced up together in congruity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To show our thoughts should rest in the same hold;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No, nor thy picture, though most gracious,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And most desired, ’cause ’tis like the best</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor witty lines, which are most copious,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Within the writings which thou hast address’d.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Send me nor this nor that, to increase my score,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But swear thou think’st I love thee, and no more.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="self-love" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Self-Love</h3>
				<p>
					<span>He that cannot choose but love,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And strives against it still,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Never shall my fancy move,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For he loves against his will;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor he which is all his own,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And cannot pleasure choose;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When I am caught he can be gone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And when he list refuse;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor he that loves none but fair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For such by all are sought;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor he that can for foul ones care,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For his judgment then is nought;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor he that hath wit, for he</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Will make me his jest or slave;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor a fool when others ⸻</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He can neither ⸻</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor he that still his mistress prays,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For she is thrall’d therefore;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor he that pays, not, for he says</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Within, she’s worth no more.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is there then no kind of men</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whom I may freely prove?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I will vent that humour then</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In mine own self-love.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
		</article>
	</body>
</html>
